## Decentralization

Introduction

Decentralization for past one and half decades or so has become the most favored policy priority among the policy makers. Decentralization is the transfer of authority and responsibility from the central government to the local governments and the empowerment of people through their local governments (Boex et al., 2005). The importance of decentralization around the world is obvious as 95 percent of democracies have elected sub-national governments (World Bank, 2000). In fact there is a vast literature on different meanings and types of decentralization, there are mainly four categories of decentralization; Political decentralization, Fiscal decentralization, Administrative decentralization and Economic decentralization (Bhatta Bhim Dev, 1990). Among them, fiscal decentralization has been the crucial issue, as it is directly related with the capacity build up of the local government and so forth enhances the democratic political regime. Fiscal decentralization is one of the topics that have been discussed in economics and policy literature by many. Fiscal decentralization, or the transfer of fiscal power from the national government to sub-national governments, is seen as a part of a reform package to improve efficiency in the public sector, to increase competition among sub-national governments in delivering public services, and to stimulate economic growth (Bahl and Linn, 1992 and Bird and Wallich, 1993). Fiscal decentralization and local governance play an increasingly important role in assuring sound public policy and democratic governance around the world. By yielding greater expenditure related responsibilities to regional and local governments, the public sector can be more flexible in response to variations in regional and local needs and demands for public services. In addition, by giving local governments real responsibility for the delivery of local government services and by allowing local governments to raise their own source revenues, local communities are better able to hold their local governments accountable for the services that they deliver. Funding of sub-national governments with formula-based intergovernmental transfers can further enhance the equity and transparency of the system of intergovernmental fiscal relations. Fiscal decentralization studies the aspects of how public goods and services are provided by regional and local governments in a government system. There are four pillars of fiscal decentralization: First, the assignment of expenditure responsibilities; second, the assignment of revenue sources to sub-national governments; third, the provision of intergovernmental fiscal transfers (or grants), and the fourth, the framework for local government borrowing and debt (Bhatta Bhim Dev, 1990).

Fiscal decentralization been one of the major interests of economists, development specialists, multilateral development agencies and the governments of less developed countries (LDCs) since 1970s (Waller and Phillips, 1997). It has been considered as one of the more effective tools of attaining economic growth and lowering of poverty in the developing countries. Numerous studies have dealt with decentralization and its effect on economic growth. First, Zhang and Zou (1996) have used the expenditure measure in their study of the impact of fiscal decentralization on economic growth of China. They have concluded that a higher degree of fiscal decentralization causes a lower degree of economic growth. The negative effect was observed from 1978 to 1992. The expenditure and revenue ratios for a country do not necessarily tell the same story (Pragna Halder, 2007). In fact, fiscal decentralization cannot be analyzed without taking into account as to which particular shade or variant of it we are attempting to investigate depending on how it mixes with other kinds of decentralizations such as political, administrative and market decentralization in a particular historical-cultural-institutional context. Recent studies, examining the relation between fiscal decentralization and economic growth, have failed to take account of the extent of the independent taxing powers available to sub-national governments. And this has substantially overstated the degree of effective decentralization.

## Decentralization in Nepal

The practice of decentralization in Nepal is almost four decades old. This makes it perhaps the oldest decentralization process in South Asia. The statutory local government institutions were created as early as 1962 immediately after the replacement of the multi-party democratic system with the so-called party-less Panchayat system in 1960 through a royal takeover. Since then, several intermittent efforts have been made to strengthen these institutions in different ways and in different times, often sailing with political waves. With the popular political movement of 1990 which restored multi-party democracy in Nepal, Nepal's decentralization policy was brought in the forefront of national agenda of reforms and continues to be the main means to translate democracy and development at the grass-root bodies. Consequently, District Development Committee, Municipality, and Village Development Committee Acts were passed in 1992 re-establishing local government institutions at the district, town, and village bodies (Manoj Shrestha, 2002). Thereafter, the Local Self Governance Act was passed in 1999 as an umbrella Act for the implementation of devolution and decentralization.

Principles and Policies of Local Self-Governance Act 1999

Local Self Governance Act 1999 has been developed according to the Constitution of the Kingdom of Nepal, 1990. The Interim Constitution of Nepal 2006 has also incorporated the fundamental principle of decentralization, pursuing the following principles and policies for the development of local self-governance system:

(a) Devolution of such powers, responsibilities, and means and resources as are required to make the local bodies capable and efficient in local self-governance.
(b) Building and developing of institutional mechanism and functional structure in local bodies capable of considering for local people and bearing responsibilities. Devolution of powers to collect and mobilize such means and resources as are required to discharge the functions, duties, responsibility and accountability conferred to the local bodies.
(d) Having the local bodies oriented towards establishing the civil society based on democratic process, transparent practice, public accountability, and people's participation, in carrying out the functions devolved on them.
(e) For the purpose of developing local leadership, arrangement of effective mechanism to make the local body accountable to the people in its own areas.
(f) Encouraging the private sector to participate in local self-governance in the task of providing basic services for sustainable development

Fundamental objectives of Local Self-Governance Act (LSGA) 1999 The Local Self-Governance Act (LSGA) of 1999 sets out the following goals of decentralization in Nepal:

- grass root participatory planning by all including ethnic communities, indigenous people
and socially and economically backward groups;
- balanced distribution of the fruits of development;
- strengthening governance and service delivery capacity of local bodies;
- co-ordinates development efforts among government, donors, non-governmental organizations, civil society and private sectors;
- enhances cost effectiveness and service efficiencies;
- development of local leadership and accountability of local bodies to local people;
- Private sector participation in providing basic services for sustainable development.

The two-tier local governance system is made up of the village development committee (VDC) and the district development committee (DDC). Every VDC has nine wards, each with a five-member elected committee, including at least one woman member. The nearly 4 000 VDCs in the country's 75 districts have been given the responsibility by the LSGA for implementing basic health education and sanitation programmes, running primary schools and literacy classes as well as community health centers. The local bodies carry out most of their activities through user groups, community-based organizations and community organizations.

Functions, Duties and Powers of the elected council in local bodies

The functions, duties and powers of the elected council in different bodies of government (Village Council, Municipal Council and District Council) have been described in article 26 in Local Self Governance Act 1999. The functions duties and powers regarding the fiscal and economic sector have been analyzed as follows:

(a) To pass the budgets, plans and programmes submitted by the Village Development Committee.
(b) To adopt the resolutions relating to levying and collecting of taxes, charges, fees, levies etc. proposed by the Village Development Committee.
(c) To adopt the resolutions relating to the raising of loans or selling or disposing or transferring of immovable properties proposed by the Village Development Committee.
(d) To discuss on the irregularities determined by the audit report of the Village Development Committee and direct the Village Development Committee to take necessary actions for the clearance of the irregularities in respect of those irregularities which can not be regularized under the prevailing law.

To grant approval, as required, on such number of positions, remuneration, allowance and other facilities of the employees proposed by the Village Development Committee as are to be borne from its own internal source.

Fiscal Decentralization in Nepal and the Legal Provisions

Fiscal decentralization is crucial for effective decentralization as it is related with the resource mobilization for development. Revenue generation authority must be provided to the local bodies so that they can generate resources for their development and funding responsibility should be devolved to local bodies for accountability and to enhance responsibility in the local bodies. It helps in developing human capital at local bodies and reduces poverty in local bodies. Decentralization approach has given top priority in fiscal decentralization and the legal provisions in this regard have put deep concern in fiscal decentralization. However, Local Self Governance Act 1999 and Regulation 2000 have adequate provisions for effective fiscal decentralization; there has been separate Local Bodies Economic Administration Regulation 2007. This regulation has developed lots of working procedures and mechanism for different local bodies.

Fiscal Decentralization in Local Self-Governance Act 1999

Legal provision is vital for effective implementation of decentralization because a central body is always express reluctance to provide authority because it is related to power issue. Hence, there has been long conflict between local bodies and central bodies. Centrally controlled development approach did not provide the good result in past in Nepal. After the restoration of democracy in 1990, constitutionally, the decentralization has been taken as the guiding principle of governance and the Interim Constitution of Nepal 2006 has accomplished this principle. Local Self -Governance Act (LSGA) 1999 and its regulation 2000 have defined the source of revenue at local bodies along with the funding principle, expenditure authority, fiscal accountability and responsibility.

LSGA 1999 has given legal authority of programme formulation, implementation, monitoring and evaluation as well as benefit sharing in local bodies. Chapter 6 of Part 2 of the Act is about formulation of plans of Village Development Committee and process of implementation. Chapter 7 of this part is about financial provision for Village Development Committee (VDC). Articles 55 to 69 are about the overall financial provision for VDC. In this part, the Act has explained about taxes in VDC bodies, Service charge, Fees, Income through selling, Loan. Similarly, the Act has described about the mode of marketing expenditure, budget heads, and provision of auction sale and account to be maintained by VDC. Last article of this part has explained about the audit of the VDC's transaction.

Part three of this Act is all about the Municipality. In this part, the Act has explained about the financial provision for municipalities. It has described about the taxes that municipality can adopt within its territory, different charges like service charge, fares, municipal tax. This part of Act has provided full authority for various kinds of taxes like land revenue and house and land tax, rental tax, enterprise tax, vehicle tax, parking tax, property tax, entertainment tax, commercial video tax, advertisement tax and many more. Likewise, part four of Act is about District Development Committee (DDC). Like VDC and municipality, the act has provided lots of authority for revenue generating in district bodies and expenditure responsibility to DDC for overall development of respective district.

Besides these financial authorities, the Act has provided various semi-judicial powers to local bodies to handle the local level disputes among the people in their territories. This shows that the Local Self Governance Act 1999 and its regulation are the milestones for effective decentralization in Nepal. The implementation status of the Act and regulation is however not satisfactory. There are lots of reasons behind this but the political instability in the country since the act passed from parliament is the most important one. The politician in central bodies always became reluctant to provide the authority to local bodies as it is concerned with the power in local bodies. The majority of different political parties in local bodies and central bodies also became another reason for this. Furthermore, the local bodies have no human capital to exercise the legal provisions.

Achievements in Fiscal Decentralization in Nepal

Fiscal decentralization and sub-national government budget management play an increasingly important role in sound public policy and democratic governance. Decentralization efforts around the world have greatly enhanced the efficiency with which government services are provided. By yielding greater fiscal responsibilities to regional and local governments, the public sector can be more flexible in response to variations in regional and local needs and demands for public services. As a result, decentralization of the public sector also increases citizen's participation in the governance process and enhances government accountability.

The Decentralization Implementation and Monitoring Committee, a strong provision in LSGA is the apex body headed by prime minister and its working committee, has the overall responsibility to monitor and direct decentralization efforts in the country. The committee has approved "Decentralization Implementation Plan (DIP)" with short and long term implementation actions to enhance the process of decentralization. The Tenth Plan/ Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) has considered decentralization as the cross cutting aspect, which is directly/indirectly linked with the poverty reduction and contributes to the four pillars of the plan. The focus of the plan is on the policy and legal reform, institutional development, resource mobilization, people's participation, local autonomy and capacity enhancement of local bodies. The plan has emphasized sectoral devolution as an important strategy to promote local governance system.

There is a provision for a Local Body Fiscal Commission (LBFC) to make recommendations to promote financial autonomy and fiscal decentralization system. The Immediate Action Plan (IAP) to improve governance and prioritize urgent efforts has become instrumental in moving the agenda of decentralized actions with regard to revenue sharing, transfer of service delivering units and formation of local service. Local Bodies Fiscal Commission (LBFC) has been constituted under the leadership of Vice Chairperson of National Planning Commission and its permanent secretariat has been established in July 2003 with full time working professionals. A detailed road map of LBFC has also been adopted in February 2003. The expenditure assignment study has been completed and its finding is being reviewed (National Planning Commission, 2004, Decentralization in Nepal).

Local bodies have been provided with additional resources from the center through revenue sharing mechanism, as envisaged in the Act. The sharing mechanism adopted for hydropower is 50% of the royalties, 30% of tourism fee, 50% royalty from mining, 10% of the revenue from the forest product, and 5 to 90% of the land registration fee (Budget speech, F/Y2004/2005, Ministry of Finance). A high level Local Bodies Strengthening Recommendation Committee headed by the Minister of Local Development has been constituted to recommend policy measures to strengthen local bodies and the process of decentralization (www.mld.gov.np).

Challenges

Lots of legal provisions have been developed for perfect fiscal decentralization, however, the implementation of these laws are not satisfactory. The decentralization has become only the policy debate issue and it is much more directed by the donors. The need and capacity of the local bodies to incorporate the legal provisions have not been assessed. There are still more than 20 laws that are contradictory with Local Self-Governance Act 1999. The political consensus for effective decentralization has not been developed yet. These are some reasons that the challenge of achieving the perfect devolution is being unsuccessful in Nepal. Recently, political regime in Nepal has been changed and the State is under the process of restructuring. The Central State is going to be a Federal State through Constitutional Assembly. There is still debate in political circle about whether decentralization or Federal State would be an effective solution for the equitable development of Nepal. Despite the above achievements and initiatives, the absence of local elected representatives has constrained the effective implementation of decentralization and local governance system. The major gaps and challenges observed are enumerated below:

- The concept and meaning of decentralization/devolution are differently understood. The different understanding among different sectors has resulted in lagging the initiation of the Decentralization Implementation Plan (DIP).
- There are still more than 20 other legal provisions which have been identified contradictory with LSGA and are yet to be finalized, which have hampered the effective implementation of decentralization and local governance.
- Orientation and commitment of central level government institutions towards decentralization in taking its advantages and ownership is not fully realized by the sectors.
- Unclear mandates, resource constraints and guidelines recognizing local priorities have resulted in vertical planning from the line agencies and shopping list from the local bodies.
- The model of the government (Unitary or Federal) has not yet been decided by the Constitutional Assembly. Hence, there is not clear sight for the decentralization in this changed political system.

Future Steps to be taken for Effective Fiscal Decentralization in Nepal

The most significant gap in implementation of the fiscal decentralization in Nepal in the past was the inefficiency in implementing agencies. The local people who are the direct beneficiaries of this policy are also incapable in providing feedback rather they put frequent pressure to the elected bodies to act effectively for proper decentralization. Effective capacity building requires at the minimum clear fiscal decentralization framework; a clear accountability for the devolved responsibilities. Likewise, markets and institutions able to respond to the emerging demand for capacity support and a minimum level of capacity within local bodies to manage a programme of capacity building are mandatory. Hence, here is a list of recommendation for effective and efficient fiscal decentralization in 'New Nepal' with new political system:
. Clear expenditure assignment (delineating roles and responsibilities) between the central and the local levels, has to be demarcated.
. Financial system and its transparency have to be linked up with the management capacity of the local bodies.
. Financial resources of local bodies should be strengthened through formula-based grant allocation, and revenue sharing on equitable basis.
- Weak fiscal discipline and less transparency prevailing in the local bodies have hampered local resource mobilization, causing high irregularities, hence well fiscal discipline should be maintained.
- Revenue sharing mechanism should be well defined among the local bodies so that the predictability of resource allocation and maximum utilization of resources could be achieved.

The funds that are now flowing out of the local funding framework should be incorporated within the local funding framework.
- The devolution guideline prepared by the respective line ministry should be compatible with the spirit of devolution and LSGA.
- Participatory planning process needs to be strengthened and consolidated to integrate all devolved functions into the planning, programming and management of the local bodies.
- It is necessary to strengthen and enhance financial efficiency, resource planning, computerized accounting, financial reporting, and auditing mechanism including social audits in local bodies.
- Gender mainstreaming, budgeting, and auditing mechanism should be instituted at all levels of local governance structure.

Conclusion
Decentralization is vital for democratic governance so that it has become a key policy for the good governance in recent arena. In Nepal, decentralization has been a key policy for every government since 1950s and it has been taken as a strong policy tool for equitable resource allocation and poverty reduction in Nepal. From the Panchayat regime to the New Republic Nepal, it is the fundamental policy that the government is adopting for rural development in development agenda. Donor agencies are more engaged in the decentralization policy implementation and huge amount of aid/loan from donor agencies have been provided in this sector. Local Self Governance Act 1999, its regulation 2000, Local Bodies Financial Administration Regulation 2007, Decentralization Implementation Plan (DIP) are some legal provisions for effective decentralization. Inclusive Local Council was elected in the last local level election but the local bodies are now lacking the elected bodies and hence, facing lot of problems in implementing the projects due to lack of political consensus.

Nepal is under the way of transformation from its 240 years from more unitary state system to Federal State through recently elected Constitutional Assembly. In this transitional period, there is void in the policy agenda, but whether the State would be Unitary or Federal in nature, the issues of decentralization would not be in low priority because, it is the most democratic and vital for the accountability. The awareness in the local people has been grown up but still insufficient. Hence, it is necessary to aware the people for their rights and duties for effective and efficient local governance. The resource mobilization capability in local level should be increased and the autonomy to local bodies should be provided for revenue generation and expenditure for their development. The central influence in every steps of development should be eradicated, then after, the fully devolved local governance system can be achieved in the nation.