## Ethics in Civil Service

Ethics is a system of accepted values, beliefs and mores of a society. Ethics is understood with moral, which is related with human behavior. What is morally right and wrong is the area of its study. There is interwoven relationship between ethics and moral. Generally, we find a thin line between these two. As a matter of fact, ethics denotes the theory of right action and the greater good whereas morals focus on the practice. This is the reason that ethics has been considered as a key component of good governance and it affects public trust in all forms of government.

The word 'Ethics' originated from a Latin word 'Ethicus' which means 'Character'. It is directly or indirectly attached with our social system that is based on the rules of conduct and it is treated as moral principles governing a person's behavior. Thus, it is a 'blended product'
of the science of the good and the nature of the right.

People talk more about the relevance of ethics not only in the life of human beings but also in state machineries as well. Eastern philosophy always pleads the necessity of ethics in politics, business, justice, and governance. Ramayan, Mahabharat, Bhagawat Geeta, Manusmriti, Upanishad, Shukra Niti, all have underscored the importance of it in day to day functioning of socio-political system of a State and human life. Chinese philosophers - Lao Tse and Confucius focused on real life application of the maxims on ethical governance so that the communities in society move in right direction.

Western political thinkers such as Plato, Aristotle, Alexander Hamilton, Immanuel Kant and J.S. Mill advocated duty of a citizen as a part and parcel of life that needs to be fulfilled in order to keep the State and society disciplined. Some of the philosophers argue that the virtues - such as justice, charity and generosity are dispositions to act. Plato - father of Western ethics asserted that "people should do what is good, provided they know what is right?"

Whether it is the case of Western or Eastern society, the relevancy of ethics is more accentuated in day to day life of people and governance. The reason is, ethics is concerned more with the questions of how people ought to act and how the government ought to function. Ethics, no doubt, is a part of human behavior but needs to manifest through mores.

Meaning

Generally speaking, it is a difficult task to define the term ethics. The meaning, scope and nature of ethics has expanded over time. The nature of ethics during the period of ancient Greek, has changed in the modern days of 21st century. However, certain philosophical sayings of ancient time are still valid and relevant in present day governance.

According to Merriam Webster Dictionary - 'ethics is the discipline dealing with what is good and bad and with moral duty and obligation'.

Aristotle puts focus on virtue as the part of ethics. He denotes it as doing the right thing by the right person at the right time to the proper extent in the current fashion and for the right reason. This statement is equally important to establish good governance in practice.

On the basis of above given definitions we can admit that ethics is the decent human conduct. It is related with human behavior that means moral, good attitude and conduct. It includes study of universal values and societal norms.

Indeed, ethics is integral to civil service. Civil service is a part of public administration. If the civil service is run in accordance with the maxims of ethics, the value of public administration will be expanded normatively. Here, ethics deals with morals and values whereas public administration is about the actions and decisions. Ethics is assessed by the political, economic, socioculture, legal and historical contexts of the State. These are the fundamental factors that influence ethics in civil service system.

Values, such as, essential quality of all men and women, human rights, natural rights and obedience to the law are practiced in day to day life. These values are the parts of ethics that were developed over the period of centuries. Values guide people on making decisions for their good causes through morals. Thus, ethics can be elucidated as a system of moral principles. Ethics does not always show the right answers to moral problems, but it can give several answers.

Civil servants are the servants of people and government. Ethics makes civil servants accountable towards their clients and makes responsible enough towards their professions. One of the fundamental objectives of civil service is to render government services to the citizens in a very consistent and effective manner. In a democratic system it is the right of people to receive quality services in a fair manner from the government. Being an elected body, the Government as the Executive of the State is accountable to the people, and it should keep all its efforts to make people happy delivering services effectively.

In civil service, professionalism develops neutrality and a code of ethics creates standards of professionalism. Such strong professionalism automatically makes a clear cut boundaryline between bureaucracy and politics which ultimately smoothens to enforce laws in a professional and equitable manner. In developing countries like ours, professional boundaryline between the politics and bureaucracy is challenged by either institution. Sometime civil servants are misguided by political leaders and political leaders are misled by civil servants.

In such a situation, bureaucracy forgets its professionalism, accountability and neutrality thereby political interference in civil service is perceptively elevated. In present day bureaucracy, it is very difficult to determine, who actually is an administrator and who is a political boss? The reason is - the civil servants also take part in political activities directly and indirectly and contrary to this, politicians make administrative decisions and impose the administrators to implement. Surprisingly politicians are more interested to transfer the civil servants and their valuable time is spent in writing a 'memo' of 'transfer-list'.

Bureaucracy as an organization has eight dimensions, such as continuous administrative activity, formal rules and procedure, hierarchical organization, use of written documents, procedure of 'rational discipline' and so on. The rational decision aspect comes from the virtue of ethics which maintains that bureaucracy is in need of high level of ethics to implement them.

Civil Service Act, 1993, (Chapter 7) pronounces the 'Conduct' of a civil servant, which is directly related with the ethics and morality, such as - punctuality and regularity; disciple and obedience; restriction on using political influence; restriction on taking part in politics; restriction on criticizing government; restriction on publishing news relating to governmental business; restriction on receiving gift, present, donation and borrowing; restriction on establishing and operating company and carrying on trade or profession; restriction on taking part in election; restriction on agitation and strike; restriction on staging strike, detention and 'Gherao'; restriction on making representation and so on. Conducts as per the provisions laid down in the Act, must be followed by the civil servants. These are the areas manifested by the law in order to develop strong ethics, integrity and sincerity in bureaucracy which have been subject being ruled out time and again. It would not be an exaggeration to say that such codes of conducts are pretty good in papers rather than actions.

Civil servants are accountable to the tax payers. They draw salary, allowance and other fringe benefits from the State-purse, which is a fund collected from people. Civil servants are generally, looked more covetous to utilize such fund for the personal gain and benefit. Values and norms in this context are sidelined by foul means. It seems that many of the personnel in bureaucracy prefer wealth to any other value. Values that permeate the social order in civil service determine the nature of governance system.

Policy makers and organizational leaders have starkly failed on inculcating ethical and moral values in bureaucracy. Earning wealth may bring fame, respect and opportunity, but one must keep in mind that such earning should be made through fair and right means only. This is how ethics should be understood. Wrong way of earning means bribery, illegal deals, corruption and misuse of power. This only leads to loss of trust and integrity of the public over bureaucracy and institution, overall. Once the level of integrity is shortened, barometer of corruption is heightened. Coveted attitude of government staff cannot address people's aspiration.

In Nepalese bureaucracy, formal and informal authority structures are working together. For weak ordinary people, formal procedures are applied and for the powerful circle (those having connection and wealthy status), the informal authority structure works well. Like in politics, Nepalese bureaucracy has a character of gerrymandering. If you are a powerful person, if you have a good connection with a political party, if you have a character of pleasing the boss by rendering personal services (Chakari) and of appearing and flattering the higher authorities for getting favours (Chaplusi), if you are competent enough to offer 'brief-case', no doubt, you can achieve what you want to attain. These forms of discriminatory treatments being extant are getting stronger in bureaucracy than ever. Power oriented decision making, rent seeking attitude, irresponsible activities, politicization of bureaucracy, individualcentric decisions and 'briefcase approach,' are pervading ethical values of bureaucracy. Such characters of present day bureaucracy have been featured as bureau-pathology. The bureau pathology of Nepalese civil service has widened the gap between government and people and created an atmosphere of discrepancy between ethics and its practice.

Once norms and values are accepted as the part and parcel of politics and bureaucracy, ethics gets stronger, thereby good governance process takes place in an effective way. In this environment, corruption and abuse of authority cannot spoil the bureaucratic integrity. If so happens, rule of law, mores and values are established in bureaucratic system that ultimately strengthens democracy in the country.

One of the major factors of deteriorating ethics is the greed of earning wealth by 'any means of acts'. The attitude of using 'any means of acts' as a tool to earn money does not follow integrity and honesty. In order to control such immoral acts, following measures can be taken and applied in real life to establish ethics.

1. Moral Education: Education fosters the personality of a person through the continuous development of his innate qualities. It aims to adjust the character of an individual with that of the society. This particular adjustment is related to the moral fiber of the society. Education is an instrument to strengthen the moral fiber, which is lacking in our education system. Value education has not been given priority neither in private schools nor in government ones. Family members also teach their children to be rich and 'great person' in their life rather than being a good person earning money through moral means. So there is a special need today for evolving a new system of moral education, which should be tuned with our cultural values and patriotism.

2. Penalize Corrupt Behavior: Corruption is related with a person's behavior and conduct. Penalties should be calibrated in terms of deterrence. Commission for the Investigation of Abuse of Authority (CIAA), a constitutional body is responsible for controlling corruption in Nepal. Despite its regular investigation on corruption and power misuse, things still are not in control.

3. Assess the Organization's Vulnerability to Corruption: It is essential to categorize the government organizations on the basis of their vulnerabilities to corruption. And accordingly strengthen information agents. CIAA can assess such vulnerabilities developing certain parameters. Simultaneously, CIAA should beef up specialized staff, such as auditors, investigators, surveillance and internal security.

4. Develop whistle blowers: In addition to the above measures, it is highly required to create a climate where covert agents in a form of whistle blowers report improper activities if happen in an organization. Whistle blowers if work overtly, they should be protected by law, because they face legal action, criminal charges, social stigma and termination from any position, office or job they hold. It is equally important that, such persons must have ethics and values of their works. What has been experienced in Nepal is that time and again wrong information is floated regarding corruption with the intention of victimizing and defaming the concerned person.

5. Change attitude about corruption: It is said that corruption, bribery and fraudulence do happen in bureaucracy as the shadow of societal image. Civil servants are the products of society and they are the members of our own society. In this context, society should be brought in the front line of moral education. Moral education if provided from primary to higher secondary level schools can create a new society full of morality and values in their behavior and conducts. Training, educational programs and practical coaching should be given to the civil servants that can change their attitudes positively. Conventional way of doing things cannot change the behavior of a civil servant that requires a change in organizational culture. Modern technology helps to control corruption. So the organizations should adopt e-governance system in an effective manner. Anti-corruption tools should be used by the concerned authorities as well, so as to bring fraudulent under the net of law.

