## Federalism and service delivery

The constitution of Nepal, 2015 has committed ending all forms of discrimination and oppression created by the feudalistic, autocratic, centralized, unitary system of governance, protecting and promoting social and cultural solidarity, tolerance and harmony, and unity in diversity by recognizing the multi- ethnic, multi-lingual, multi-religious, multi-cultural and diverse regional characteristics, resolving to build an egalitarian society founded on the proportional inclusive and participatory principles in order to ensure economic equality, prosperity and social justice, by eliminating discrimination based on class, caste, region, language, religion and gender and all forms of caste-based untouchability. It has also committed to socialism based on democratic norms and values including the people's competitive multiparty democratic system of governance, civil liberties, fundamental rights, human rights, adult franchise, periodic elections, full freedom of the press, and independent, impartial and competent judiciary and concept of the rule of law, and build a prosperous nation. The constitution is promulgated in order to fulfill the aspirations for sustainable peace, good governance, development and prosperity through the federal, democratic, republican system of governance. The Thirteenth Plan had an objective of curbing corrupt activities and contribute to good governance. In order to achieve this objective, the strategies adopted were carrying out awareness-raising, preventive, and punitive programs; implementing objective and transparent criteria for checking corruption in public management; and bringing the private and non-government sectors under the purview of corruption control measures as well.

The vision of the Fourteenth Plan is to develop a clean and healthy society by controlling corruption while the goal is to promote good governance through adopting zero tolerance policy to corruption. The programs include the formulation of policies and prepare/revise laws considering the provisions of UNCAC; monitoring and revision of the national implementation strategy against corruption; promote collaboration and partnership to implement the laws and develop policies and institutional framework; to create awareness at different levels through implementing promotional and preventing activities; identification of corruption prone areas and carryout research and studies; use of modern ICTs and build the capacity of corruption control institutions; expansion of technical auditing in public infrastructure related activities in order to make the public officials accountable to quality works; and emphasizing the moral values, use of good practices/behavior, raising public awareness and promote good governance.

With the promulgation of the Constitution of Nepal 2015, Nepal is constitutionally a federal democratic republican state. As one of its major features, the Constitution envisages three tiers of governments at central, provincial and local with seven provinces and 753 local level rural municipalities and municipalities. All three tiers of governments are constitutionally assigned exclusive powers along with concurrent powers to be exercised jointly by the federal and provincial governments as well as by federal, provincial and local governments. The sub-national governments have got constitutional status with constitutionally defined political structures and powers. Likewise the federal government can also declare certain areas as autonomous or protected for social reasons, economic development, cultural protection. The existing districts (77) will serve as the administrative unit for parliamentary constituencies rather than the unit for local government administration. In order to translate the constitutional provisions into actions, restructuring of the state and institutions is required.

The 2072 Constitution has reserved few functions exclusively for the federal government. It stipulates that "central level irrigation projects, quarantine, national and international environment management, national parks, wildlife reserves, wetlands, national forest policy, carbon services, land use policy, and environment adaptation" (schedule 5) will be a federal power. The "land management, land records, agricultural and livestock development; national forest within the province, water utilization and environment management, cooperative institutions, state level irrigation" (Schedule 6) will be a provincial power. The areas of exclusive local power include "distribution of land/house  entitlement certificate, agriculture and animal husbandry, agro-products management, animal health, and cooperatives, management, operation and control of agricultural extension, micro-hydro projects, alternative energy, protection of watershed and wildlife" (Schedule 8). The list of concurrent powers at the federal and provincial levels include "quality standard, monitoring, price control, supply and distribution of essential commodities and services; veterinary services; science and technology and scientific research; environment and biodiversity conservation; use of inter-provincial extended forests, protected forests areas and water; pesticides, and agricultural policies and related laws (schedule 7). The concurrent power at the federal, provincial and local levels asper schedule 9 includes agriculture, cooperatives, irrigation, forests, wildlife, water use, environment and biodiversity, landless squatters management and royalty received from the use of natural resources. Moreover, the Constitution stipulates that executive power at the local level will be vested in either a Rural Municipal Executive or a Municipal Executive, who will be overseen by either an elected Rural Municipal Chairperson or a Municipal Mayor, respectively. Looking at the list of powers in the constitution, these are officially allocated across
multiple tiers of government, leaving it unclear where certain powers should lie. There is
particular ambiguity over agricultural research, food safety, environmental protection and 
conservation, and agricultural education. Typically, when there are concurrent functions,
the principle of subsidiarity prevails, which means that the lowest government tier that is
capable of performing the function should be given the mandate to do so.

Consequently, the constitution has two clear implications for the governance of the agricultural sector: (1) authority and autonomy for various agricultural and livestock activities will be devolved from the Ministries in Kathmandu to the seven provincial governments as well as newly constituted local governments, and (2) those new local governments will be overseen by elected executives, who will be able to determine their own policy priorities. However, exactly how and over which domains authority will be devolved remains unresolved, as "agricultural sector" is listed as a concurrent function across all tiers of government in the Constitution.

