## Governance and public service dilivery: A case of Agricultural sector in Nepal

### What is governance

Governance has been defined to refer to structures and processes that are designed to ensure accountability, transparency, responsiveness, rule of law, stability, equity and inclusiveness, empowerment, and broad-based participation. Governance also represents the norms, values and rules of the game through which public affairs are managed in a manner that is transparent, participatory, inclusive and responsive. Governance therefore can be subtle and may not be easily observable. In a broad sense, governance is about the culture and institutional environment in which citizens and stakeholders interact among themselves and participate in public affairs. It is more than the organs of the government. (UNESCO) The Governance is not just about government. It is also about political parties, parliament, the judiciary, the media, and civil society. It is about how citizens, leaders and public institutions relate to each other in order to make change happen. So, governance requires three aspects as per DFID (2006).

State capability: the extent to which governments and leaders are able to get things done.

Responsiveness: whether public policies and institutions respond to the needs of citizen and uphold their rights.

Accountability: the ability of the citizens, civil society and the private sector to scrutinize public institutions and governments and hold them to account. This includes ultimately the opportunity to change leaders by democratic means.

### Good governance

The World Bank (1996) states good governance as relating future oriented open policies, developing professional bureaucracy, transparent and accountable government, effective service delivery, strong civil society and rule of law. Furthermore, the four pillars of governance are accountability, transparency, predictability and participation (cited in Paudel, 2011). Good governance is fair, good and managed government, which emphasizes its action against all sorts of ills in the political, financial, judiciary, social service and human rights. UNDP (1996) defines fifteen different elements of good governance. They are: rule of law, transparency, responsiveness, equity, common consensus, effectiveness, efficiency, accountability, strategic thinking, legality, resource caution, and proper environmental capability, cooperativeness and community orientation.


Service delivery

The quality and availability of essential services are key measures of governance. Public services underpin the social contract between states and citizens and, as such, are an indicator of the health of a society. Grossly inadequate service delivery signals fragility. Governments everywhere deliver services effectively when there is accountability between citizens and their leaders. Accountability emerges as a complex chain of relationships linking users, policy makers and service providers. Services reach the public in a twostep process: policy makers allocate and providers produce the services. The delivery of services is a set of institutional arrangements adopted by the government to provide public goods and services to its citizens (OECD, 2008). Therefore, it is the specific institutional arrangements that critically influence the performance of public service delivery.

The public support modality for agricultural development is changing fast in the world. There have been dramatic changes and reforms in the implementing actors and service providers. However, in Nepal, it is still the responsibility of the government to develop technology, transfer and provide services to the farmers and entrepreneurs.

### Corruption and governance

Tranparency International (TI) publishes Corruption Perception  Index (CPI) every year since 1996. It ranks the countries based on perceived levels of corruption, as determined by expert assessments and opinion surverys. The CPI generally defines corruption as "the misuse of public power for private benefit". The survey takes into account the areas like actions against the officials misusing the public position, the level of transparency, accountability and corruption in public sector, extra amount to the paid (as bribe) to get public services, misuse of power and position by the government, parliament and judiciary, corruption in trade and business, accountability in political field among others.

The position of Nepal has not changed during the last decade. It remained at 131st position in 2007 and of recent 2016 assessment it still maintains that position. The highest score  (higher the score better is the citizens' perception about government transparency) achieved during this period was in 2013 (31) which ranked Nepal 116th amongst 177 countries.

Among the SAARC countries, Bhutan received the highest score (65) while Afganistan received the lowest (11-15) between the year 2014 and 2016. In these years the score of India remained between 38-40 Sri Lanka (36-38), Pakistan (29-32), Nepal (27-29), and Bangladesh (25-26). During this period, Denmark attained the highest score with score nearing 90-92 indicating a very low level of corruption. The low scores of the SAARC indicate endemic corruption in country's public sector.

The Global Competitiveness Index (GCI) tracks the performance of around 140 countries on 12 pillars of competitiveness. It assesses the factors and institutions identified by emperical and theoretical research as determining improvements in productivty, which in turn is the main determinant of long-term growth and an essential factor in economic growth and prosperity.

In 2017/18, the competitiveness has improved across most countries in South Asia. In case of Nepal it has improved from 98th position in 2016-17 to 88th in 2017-18. The score for doing business has improved for Nepal. Nepal stood at 125th position with a score of 3.3 in 2009/10 which improved gradually over the years and attained an 88th position with a score of 4.02 in 2017/18.

The most problematic factors in doing business in Nepal are identified as:

1. Government inability
2. Inefficient government bureaucracy
3. Inadequate supply of infrastructure
4. Policy instability
5. Corruption
6. Access to financing
7. Poor work ethic in national labor force
8. Restrictive labor organizations
9. Inadequately educated workforce
10. Insufficient capacity to innovate

The factors above shows that the instability of the government is the most important factor creating problems in promoting competitiveness and doing business followed by inefficient government bureaucracy, inadequate infrastructure development, corruption, etc. There has been reduction in contribution of factors in creating problems over the years such as policy instability, corruption, poor work ethic in labor force, and restrictive labor regulations.

The institution which is considered the first pillar of the global competitiveness has many sub-components that are related with governance. The rank of Nepal with their scores for 2017/18 has improved over the six years period (from 2012/13) for sub components such as diversion of public funds, judicial independence, burden of government regulation, efficiency of legal framework in settling disputes, reliability of police services, ethical behavior of firms, and efficacy of corporate boards.

Although the rank has improved, overall, the rating for public trust in politicians, for score reflecting tendency for irregular payments and bribes, the adoption of favoritism in decisions made by government and transparency of government policy making has not improved. These measures show a need for adopting measures to improve the overall governance in Nepal.

Irregularities and Service Delivery

Previous studies carried out by different individuals and institutions in Nepal have assessed the status of service delivery in agricultural sector that shows no significant improvement. Root (2014) measured the responsiveness of local government in delivering agricultural services to farmers. He found that total agricultural service responsiveness was 59 percent, which means that farmers received 59 percent of the services they ranked as priorities. They also found that service responsiveness varies significantly: farmers across all lower socioeconomic categories (Dalits, Janajatis, women, farmers with less than half a hectare of land, and subsistence farmers) received lower than average responsiveness. Controlling for other socioeconomic factors, district, and farmer affiliation, farmers in these lower socioeconomic groups can expect to receive between 11 and 18 percentage points lower agricultural service responsiveness.

The Transparency International in 2015 carried out a study with regard to the quality of service delivery by public organizations and level of satisfaction of service recipients. 61 percent of the respondents faced different types of corrupt practices while receiving services from different public service sectors. On an average, 54 percent of the respondents mentioned that the quality of services have improved somewhat. About 55 percent of the respondents mentioned the improvement in quality of services in agriculture and land survey while only 42 percent in case of forestry (TI, 2016).

The respondents also experienced corruption (of different forms) while receiving services. About 51 percent of the households who received services from land reform and revenue were the victims of one or other form of corruption followed by land survey (47%), forest (37%) and agriculture (28%). Payment of unauthorized or unregulated money is among the various forms of corruption. The study shows that about 57 percent of the total services receiving households have faced corruption or irregularities to receive services from service sectors by paying bribe/unregulated money. Among the agricultural sector, this was the highest in land survey (57%) followed by forestry (52%), agriculture (48%) and land reform and revenue (43%).

The complaints received in CIAA for different sub-sectors of agriculture vary in terms of nature and level by sub-sectors. In case of land management, complaints are related to practice of changing ownership title of the land from a real owner to a fake one by tampering land ownership documents; deliberately certifying the land whose ownership title has been frozen as a freehold property or undertaking acts of releasing the land without making appropriate checks and, based on this, registering the lands under different ownership title.

In addition to this, practices were also observed like registering public lands as private property, registering lands belonging to the government, public or *guthi* to specific individuals; instead of registering under government ownership title, registering the unclaimed lands under unauthorized individuals; considerably undervaluing the lands during registration process thereby employees securing financial benefits and draining government revenues. In addition to these, due to lack of clear and transparent procedures related to distribution of land to the squatters by the Landless Problem Settlement Commissions established periodically by the government, the real landless squatters have not been able to get benefits from the government's land distribution program.

In case of forestry sector the complaints were related to unauthorized revision of quantity of timbers to be logged from the forest, drawing out fake inventory for unauthorized loggings and issuing licenses to operate brick kilns, saw mills, and furniture industries in and near around forest land than what is being allowed by the law. It was found that employees, working for the forest sector and Community Forest Users Group, are involved in these malpractices, granting permission to cut logs more than the annual allowable cuts, keeping or cause to keep false record of illegally removed forest product, no proper monitoring to curb illegal import and export of prohibited forest (wood) and forest product and smuggling of forest and forests product and no action against the smugglers. There has also been an increased tendency of fraudulent appropriation of funds or property of the community forest groups.

In case of irrigation, the complaints were related to the misuse of the funds allocated to water users' committees in the name of operation and maintenance, officials releasing funds (tranche) and granting completion certificate of the irrigation projects/schemes without having quality work, officials' retention and transfers by taking money, and procurement related. 

In case of agriculture and livestock, the nature of the complaints were improper distribution of subsidized production and marketing materials, submitting fake bills of procurement, availing public fund to incompetent service providers, low quality and less quantity fertilizer import and corruption thereof, and related to transfers of officials. A study conducted in 2015 surveying agro-processing enterprise located in five districts, namely, Kathmandu, Lalitpur, Bhaktapur, Chitwan and Nawalparasi found that on an average, an agro-processing firm paid Rs 4810 in bribe to meet the formalities of registration, operation, and renewal. Agro-processing enterprises are small in nature with an average fixed cost of less than one million rupees. The study found that the higher the taxes and fees payable by the enterprises, higher was the payment for bribes. Every rupee increase in the tax and fee increased the bribe amount by Rs 0.10. Bribing also increased with increase in the sunken costs. Every thousand increase in the fixed costs increased the bribe paid by Rs 67.

The agencies related to public procurement have not strictly followed financial rules, procedures and provisions made in the Public Procurement Act. To evade legal procedures, a single procurement decision has been split into several numbers of procurement, and, in some instances, public procurements have been made directly without seeking quotations and issuing tender notices. Similarly, public construction works, procurement, and repairs and maintenance have been accepted from individual, firm or company bidding higher rates than what was being quoted; and in case of physical infrastructure projects, substandard construction works have been found to be completed or even fake bills and vouchers have been submitted for securing payments without undertaking actual construction works.

In some cases, payments have been made after revising expenditure liabilities without furnishing reasons for their increments or legitimacy for revising cost estimates of the plans, programs or projects; or without undertaking technical audits of the works completed as per predetermined norms and standards or, after verifying the sub-standard works as completed ones. Similarly, complaints include that the quotations and tender calls have been approved by unauthorized employees under the prevailing laws, misuse of verification order against the spirit and intention of the law; goods have been procured and construction works carried out through an unhealthy process. In addition to this, there were also cases where procured materials have not been stored as per bills and receipts. There are practices of irregular employee deputations, submission of fake bills and vouchers related to DSA and transport allowances. In some instances, there are practices of personal use of public property, non-deposit of revenues into public accounts and the practices of non-settlement of irregularities in time.

Unauthorised extra payments and bribes have been a routine and a normal part of life in forestry sector on the part of the service receiver. These are paid for issuing collection and transport permits for forest products, the implementation of district Five Year Work Plans, and in the preparation of reports such as EIAs and IEEs in those districts which have forest resources to be exploited. 

CIAA has carried out sting operation to trap corrupt public officials. In FY 2016-17, 68 public officials from different offices were trapped. Out of this number, 47 percent (32 number) were from the agricultural sector. Among them, 26 were from land revenue, land reform and land survey; 3 from the forests, 2 from the irrigation and 1 from the agriculture. This shows that the frontline workers working in various offices of the Ministry of Land Reform and Management where people have to frequently approach for services have demanded extra money to provide the required services.

Transparency International also carried out the world's largest survey asking citizens about their direct personal experience of bribery in their daily lives, their perceptions of corruption challenges in their own countries, and their willingness to act against corruption. Around the world nearly 1 in 4 people said that they paid a bribe for public services in the 12 months prior to when the survey took place. It was found that on average the bribery rate in the European Union was lowest (9%), while it was the highest in the Commonwealth of Independent States in Eurasia, and the Middle East and North Africa region (30%). It was 28 percent in the Asia Pacific region

TI published a Global Corruption Barometer for Nepal in 2013. It showed that 31 percent of the people who report having paid a bribe to 1 of 8 services. The services were related with police, judiciary, registry, land, medical, education, tax and utilities. Perceptions of corruption, by institution showed that political parties were most corrupt (score of 4.6 out of 5) followed by civil servants (4.4), legislature (4.2), judiciary (4.1), private sector (3.5), NGOs (3.2) and education system (3.2) and medical and health (3.0) (TI, 2013).

It is evident that different tiers of government have authority over different elements of agriculture, which will require high levels of horizontal and vertical coordination. Extension staffs are responsible to local governments but hired through the Provincial Public Service Commission, creating disconnect between authority and accountability.

Given its uncertain status under the Constitution, it is difficult to devise a strategy that gives enough authority over agricultural research to the provincial level while working within capacity constraints. There are two primary issues to keep in mind in formulating an approach. The first concerns the ability to find sufficient staff and resources to establish such a large number of subnational institutes and research stations, given existing capacity constraints. Indeed, whether every province needs a station for every agro-ecological zone is questionable, especially if NARC at the central level can play a facilitating role in sharing agro-ecological specific findings across provinces when applicable.

Formulation of land use policy is the authority of the federal government while land management and maintaining land records is the authority of the provincial government. It is not clear how the records of land at the province and local levels are linked and maintained a broader national record which is considered important for future planning. At the local and provincial level, there will be a shortage of trained human resources in land management in general and field survey in particular. The institutions may have low institutional legal capacity to perform judicial decision in land related issues.

In case of forestry sector, the challenge is to minimize conflict/tradeoff between the demand of forest land for developing physical infrastructures and the environmental sensitivity of the forests (maintaining at least 40 percent forest area for environmental balance). The other challenges include maintaining the autonomy of a worldwide successful model of community management of forests; future of collaborative forest, a model being adopted in Terai; regulating the areas where there are commitments and concerns such as biodiversity and REDD+; managing the basin level watersheds; authority (province or local government) to handing over the national forests to local communities; management of different types of forests in buffer zone etc.

In order to ensure food safety and quality control, there is a need for institutional mechanism equivalent of food quality control center, at provincial level. Similarly, services for inspections and licenses should be provided at the local level.

In federal countries, agricultural research is usually a concurrent function of the national government and the provincial government. Like in India research between the federal and province levels can be linked through Coordinated Research Projects, which are also managed through NARC. These research initiatives could contribute to ensure directing of the resources toward important commodities, and coordination of research among many different agencies and tiers of government.

There should be decentralized research activities considering local relevance due to location-specific nature of crop cultivation or livestock management. This approach also corresponds to Nepal's Agriculture Development Strategy, which specifies "a decentralized research system responsive to farmers and agro-enterprise needs". One of the major concerns in the restructuring process is where responsibilities for agricultural research should lie as research and development (R&D) is allocated to both the federal and province levels in the new Constitution. First and foremost, the new Constitution will have implications for authority (that is, which level of government is responsible for various agricultural research activities).

There are a number of concerns with the current system of extension. First, access to extension is relatively uneven across the country. Since districts have a different range of cultivated land, the distribution of resources should be determined by the number of farming households residing in them. Notably, the Agriculture Development Strategy has stressed that the priority should be extending coverage and improving equity of agricultural extension services.

Strong functional linkages should be established between irrigation and agricultural production. This should focus on system and on-farm water management to increase irrigation efficiency, policy formulation as well as implementation, operation and maintenance as well as new system development and reduce institutional gap between irrigation and agricultural line agencies.

There are lists of different powers to different governments and some unclarity and overlap is also observed. As national parks, wildlife reserves and wetlands, national forest policies, environmental management and carbon services have been the power of federal governments, Utilization of forests, mountains, forest conservation areas and waters stretching in inter-state form are the concurrent authority of federal and provincial governments. Forests have also been a concurrent power of federal, provincial and local governments. It is to be assumed that the protection and management of community forests is the power of the local authority.

It is necessary to maintain cadaster in order to issue a land entitlement certificate. It is better to have a unified national cadaster and single land certificate for which federal government should play a role to maintain land records and establish linkages with province and local government.

The promotion of good governance and effective service delivery have been emphasized by the governments through various policies and programs in Nepal. This can be achieved by strengthening the value of rule of law and the state machinery, creation of people's participation, transparency, accountability and creating a corruption-free environment. The access of economic and social services should be emphasized for those excluded from the mainstream of development. For this, the private sector and civil society (including NGOs and community organizations) need to be included as the partners in development. Necessary laws, policies and programs need to be revised, formulated and implemented in addition to federal system of governance, institutional strengthening and capacity development.

