 PANCHAYAT PERIOD: PANCHAYAT SYSTEM: Panchayat System was introduced by king Mahendra on 1st Poush, 2017 when he dissolved democratic government and banned political parties. The declared objective of the system was to evolve a progressive, democratic, exploitationless and dynamic society. To achieve this, partyless, class co-ordination, decentralization and co-operative movement were enforced even as politics for development was identified as the strategy of the system. The role of the king was inalienably solicited. In 2019 B.S., came a new constitution under the changed system. Subsequently, the second constitution amendment was done to the same constitution, in 2032 B.S. , ‘Back to Village National Campaign’ which was introduced in 2024 B.S. with the objective of to bring about economic, political, social, cultural and national awareness were formed as constitutional bodies, king Mahendra passed away in 2028 B.s. and he was succeeded by the crown prince Birendra. Again, subsequent to demonstration in favour of the multiparty democracy in 2036 B.S which led to the declaration of National Referendum that was held in the following year. Giving away the political power to decide by the citizens to choose between either multiparty democracy or the improved Panchayat system. In 2037 B.S. referendum, the mandate of the people went in favor of the improved Panchayat System by 54.79% of votes. 
DEMOCRATIC PERIOD:

After the introduction of democracy in the kingdom of Nepal on Falgun7, 2007BS, a joint government consisting of five representatives of the Ranas and five representatives of the Nepali Congress Party was formed under the premiership of Mohan shumsher which was based on the Delhi Accord. A dispute soon took place between the representatives of the Ranas and the congress as the council of ministers was divided into two grups having different was divided into two grups having different idiologies. Further, Mohan Shumsherresigned from the prime minstership as he was blamed by the congress people that he chold not efficiently perform his duties and responsibilities.

 

Soon after, a government on the premiership of Matrika Prasad Koiral was formed by the epali Congress Party but this government also collapsed within a short period of months because of the rift within the Nepali Congress party itself. Thereafter, governmtn headed by Matrika Prasad Koirala (Rastriya Praja Party), Tanka Prasad Acharya (Praja Parishad) and Dr. K.I. Singh (Sanyukta Prajatantra Party) were formd. Nevertheless, none of government could call for general elections. In the histoy of Nepal, first general election was held on 7th Falgun 2015 B.S. in which Nepali Congress Party obtained the majority of the seats (74/109) in the parliament and formed a new government under the preiership of B.P. Koirala. Exercising the power under the provision of article 55 of the constitution of the Kingdom of Nepal of 2015 B.S., the then king Mahendra dismissed the cabinet, dissolved the parliament and took over the affairs of the state. He banned on political parties.

 After ban upon political parties by King Mahendra through his coup, the nation had undergone with several political incidents. There was the beginning of yet another autocratic rule after Ranas fo king Mahendra as he formed the cabinet under his own chairmanship. He declared the partyless panchayat systems. Although there was ban on political parties, they continued their political activities underground.
 In-course of fighting for democracy, there occurred many political incidents as Janakpur incidents, Jhapa revolution, Sukhani Assassination, plane Hijack, fire at Singha Durbar, Timburbote incidents, National reconciliation policy of B.P. Koirala, etc. Referendum was held on Baisakh 20, 2037 B.S. to decrease the pressure of political parties. In the referendum, the reformed Panchayat Party got 54.79% of votes whereas multiparty system got 45.21%. 
Even underground, continuous efforts of political parties made the opposition voice stronger. Nepali Congress and United Leftist Front jointly declared the revolution formally on the against of Panchayat system under the commandments of Ganesh Man Singh on 7th Falgun 2018 B.S. after about one and half month’s struggle, democracy was restord on the 26th chaitra 2046 B.S. it ended dictatorial rule of autocratic ruler and seized the sovereignty from the hand of king to people.

 After the restoration of democracy, an Interim Government was formed on 6th Baisakh, 2047 B.S. under the leadership of Mr. Krishna Prasad Bhattarai. This government held the election in 2048 B.S. in which Nepali won majority in the parliament (110/205) and it formed the government in the premiership of Girija Prasad Koirala. In 2051 B.S., Girija Prasad Koirala resigned from the post and the king subsequently dissolved the parliament. A Mid-term parliamentary election was held in 2052 B.S. in which none of the parties got clear majority. The communist party of Nepal (UML) got the maximum number of seats in parliament which broke the history as Manamohan Adhikari, the first communist prime-minister. Then after political instability started in Nepal, after dissolving this government, the governments of Sher Bahadur Deuba, Lokendra Bahadur Chand, Surya Bahadur Thapa, and again girija Prasad Koirala were formed.
 In 2052 B.S., with the aim of bringing a radical change in the country through, round table conference, constituent assembly and abolishment of monarchy, CPN Maoist launched a decade long armed revolution against the government which caused many positive and negative effects to the country. On 19th Jestha, 2058 B.S., the Narayanhiti Royal massacre took place in which King Birendra’s families were all killed. As a result, his second brother Gyanendra ascended the throne of Nepal. On 19th Magh, 2061 B.S., king Gyanendra took the regressive action by dissolving democractic government under Sher Bahadur Deuba and followed by the appointment of cabinet led by himself as the chairman. He did so, with enforcing martial law in the country and detaining the major parties leaders. After the king’s undemocratic move, seven party Alliance and the CPN Maosit signed 12 points agreement (consensus) on 5th Mangshir 2062 B.S. in India which proved to be a historical road map fo the change in the country.
 Within the framework of 12 point consensus, SPA (seven party alliance) declared people’s movement against the king’s government which was indirectly supported by CPN Maoist that was still underground. The movement began from 24th Chaitra 2062 and after 49 days of struggle on 11th Baisakh, 2063 B.S. king Gyanendra handed over the supreme authority and sovereignty of the nation to the political parties releasing the ban on political parties. Finally, Loktantra was established which brought back huge enthusiasm in the Nepali people and the political leaders.
 The Declaration of House of Representatives (HoR) was made which curtailed and suspended the king’s power and privileges. This declaration established the HoR as the powerful body in the nation through which several big changes were caused in the political scenario of the Nepal. Like Comprehensive Peace Accord was signed between Nepal government and the CPN Maoist on 22nd Mangshir, 2063 and Maoist was brought in the main political stream and got involved in the Interim Government that promulgated Interim Constitution of Nepal, 2063 on 1st Magh, 2063 B.S. Constituent Assembly Election was held by the Interim Government on 28th Chaitra, 2064 B.S. which made CPN Maoist the largest political party in Nepal. Constituent Assembly held its first meeting on 15th Jestha, 2064 and declared Nepal as the Democratic Republic country and formally ended the monarchy of Nepal.
 The constituent Assembly was established for two years time to write the constitution but due to several failures of the political parties to reach to the logical conclusion about the national issues it went on extending the term for four years. And ultimately, it was dismissed by Baburam Bhattarai on 2069 Jestha 14, due to the misunderstanding and self interest motives of the leaders of various political parties. Situation grew even worse when there was huge and critical inter and intra political conflicts. Thus, now the country is running with extreme political and constitutional disabilities.
 
