## Road safety: A formidable challenge for Nepal

Road safety is defined as the condition wherein no road accidents occur. Therefore, when discussing about the safety on the roads, an introspection of road accidents is warrented. Road accidents are the loss or harm in lives and/or properties in public transport routes inside or outside the mode of transport. Road accidents generally cause loss of traveller, driver or the people coming in contact due to their proximity to the road during the time of accident. Often times the items being transported by the vechicle are subject to accidental losses. Since, road safety is the reverse of road accidents, the number of property or life lossess in such accidents is a direct evidence of road safety status.

Development of roadway transport is one of the important criterion to assess a country's economic development. It is regrettable that a highly regarded infrastructure serving as backbone to development should be noted for its flaws that leads to lossess in human lives. While an essential service to the public, it is one of the leading cause of death from non-natural means for Nepal.

Globally, more than 1.35 million people die in road accidents and an estimated 50 million sustain injuries (Global status report on road safety 2018, launched by WHO in December 2018). 2541 road deaths and 4144 injuries were recorded in FY 2017-18 in Nepal. Most of those who are killed in the accidents are youths of age group less than 26 years.

The number of vechicles on roads in Nepal is rising, urban centres are congested, and motorway networks are expanding. Two major road accidents have occurred in a span of less than two weeks - one in Nuwakot and another in Dang in 2018 - with death toll crossing 40. On December 14 a mini-truck carrying over 40 persons fell some 400 metres below the road in Dupcheshwor Rural Municipality in Nuwakot. Twenty people died. On December 21, a bus carrying students and teachers veered off a road in Dang, killing 23 people, most of them were aged between 16 and 20. 

Road accidents along the mountainous roads have become common in Nepal - in majority of cases vehicles falling off the roads - and fatalities are very high. Every time a major road accident occurs, the stakeholders express concern and talk about measures to be taken to curb road crashes. Then talks slowly die down only to emerge after another major road accident.

There are some frightening figures that come from roads in Nepal. At least 29,258 cases of road accident were reported in the last three years of 2018, according to Metropolitan Traffic Police Division (MTPD) statistics. As many as 497 people lost their lives in the road accidents and as many 258 youths died over the period on the Valley roads. According to traffic police data, people aged 17-35 are more vulnerable to road fatalities. 

The major causes of road accidents in Nepal are negligence on the part of drivers, speeding, poor and congested roads, haphazard overtaking, overload and old vehicles. Driving along the treacherous mountainous roads is a challenge and a poorly maintained vehicle carrying passengers more than capacity simply increases the chances of a fatal crash. In the name of development, new roads are also being built rapidly and haphazardly, at times without carrying out proper studies. In some areas, passenger vehicles are allowed to ply the tracks which are not suitable for them.


That said, it will be wrong to say only the poor condition of the roads leads to accidents. Owners of the vehicles, especially the commercial buses and trucks, rarely invest in proper repair and maintenance. Then there is carelessness/negligence on the part of drivers. Reckless driving - speeding and haphazard overtaking - is common, while drivers often tend to drive overloaded vehicles, carrying more passengers than capacity. And this is not possible without the support of law enforcers. Traffic cops deployed along the highways to keep tabs on vehicles and drivers often tend to ignore the condition of the vehicles or whether they care to carry more people than capacity in return for a few hundred rupees. There certainly are traffic rules and regulations, but their implementation has been poor, due largely to corruption. All in all, the major causes of road accidents in Nepal have already been identified. It may be impossible to completely end road accidents, but fatalities can be drastically reduced if the government and its agencies work in tandem and adopt a holistic framework to ensure safe transport system. Roads play an important role in a country's development, but failure to maintain them and the vehicles plying them can be costly. The government must recognise road safety as an issue and implement strong regulations to curb road accidents and save lives.

There is a general lack of awareness of basic traffic rules, absence of traffic signals and lights, and dangerous road conditions. Finally, neither passenger nor commercial vechicles come equipped with basic safety features. It is common to drive without a license or seat belt. The general public are reluctant to help accident victims for fear of getting caught up in court battles, whilst medical help is often too little too late. So, unlike other developing countries such as Brazil and Russia, the number of people dying on the road accidents in Nepal shows no signs of receeding.

There is no shortage of government ministers, activists, and non-government organizations (NGOs) trying to address this problem. There are even interventions through law enforcement assigning fines for violators of, for example, speed limit in a mostly busy commute. However understandable that imposing steep fines is to deter traffic violations and instill road discipline, recent reports on traffic accidents suggest that initiatives undertaken in the past few years have largely been unsuccessful.

Community programmes aim to build 'road safety as a mass movement' especially amongst the youth who tend to suffer disproportionately in accidents. These costs of life and taxation, which government levies for use of public means of transport, are borne disproportionately by the poor and vulnerable, pedestrians, cyclists, drivers of two- and/or three-wheel motor vehicles and passengers of unsafe public transportation. Like India has recently started, Nepal should too incorporate or the "Four Es" of road safety -- Education, Engineering, Enforcement and Environment into its road safety programme.

On the other hand, the case for leniency is weak, be it in terms of the sums charged or vigilance enforced. The usual calculation made by motorists involves both the penalty of violating a rule and the probability of being caught. Both need to be high. Classic deterrence theory suggests that the violations in general are inversely related to the certainty, severity and swiftness of punishment. In all, states should be wary of prematurely diluting the penalties. If some states do it, others may follow suit-signs of which are already apparent. We do not need competitive penalty devaluations to stilt the efficacy of the new fine structure. Road safety is at stake.

A way out of tragic incidents of roadway accidents is by working with the Department of Roads, the WHO and the World Bank to strengthen regulatory institutions, design and engineer safer roads, and improve emergency response and medical care systems. It is working to increase awareness of road safety, the importance of obeying traffic rules and driving safely. The government should endorse the United Nations' Safe System Approach, and also should introduce road safety as part of school curriculum.
