# Op-eds (The Rising Nepal)

## The Politics Of Identity And Inclusion

Karin Pettersson

05 Aug, 2020

Anonymous, camouflage-clad men taking protesters away in unmarked cars -- federal agents, sent by the United States president, Donald Trump, with the obvious intent of escalating violence. This is what's happening in the city of Portland. 'Can we call it fascism yet?' asked the New York Times columnist Michelle Goldberg.

Trump responded by saying that the push should be extended to more Democrat-led cities. And, across the US, a battle is going on, for values, dignity and democracy -- and over power and words.

A couple of weeks ago, the 80-year-old civil-rights activist John Lewis died. When Barack Obama was elected president, he gave Lewis a handwritten note: It read: 'Because of you, John.' Many interpreted the election of Obama as an end to the struggle of the civil-rights movement. They got it wrong the moment Trump won the presidency on a platform of racism, thinly disguised as concern for white, working-class men.

The Black Lives Matter protests are rooted in racial oppression, where African-Americans are imprisoned, die prematurely, lose their jobs and are disproportionally hit by the pandemic. But the fight is also about something more -- the right to be seen as a full human being. You could call it a struggle for democracy. One could also call it, as some have, identity politics.

Pressure point

Is there a point when one person's freedom struggle turns into another's loss? The answer, in a way, is yes. Social status is not just about money but also about hierarchy. When women move up, men do not have to suffer in absolute terms -- but relationships change. In this place of friction, conflict and a feeling of loss can emerge. It is this pressure-point populists exploit and try to amplify.

Within the left, class and identity are often set against each other. Among left-wing debaters, dismissing transgender people or advocating harsh treatment of immigrants has become a way of capturing the conservative moment, without purportedly having to give up one's own identity as a champion of justice.

What liberals such as Yascha Mounk call threats to 'freedom of speech' are often (though not always) something else -- massive, organised criticism in a public sphere which incentivises and exacerbates hatred.

The alleged conflict between class and identity is partly due to the fact that social-democratic movements today lack an idea of how economic equality can be achieved. But the answer to this failure should not be to ignore demands for justice. In a left-wing analysis, the struggle for expanded minority rights cannot be detached from economic justice: they presuppose each other.

An argument sometimes put forward is that too much focus on identity politics is counterproductive, because it might alienate the majority. If Obama had not been so black, Trump would not have been elected. If women had not pushed so hard for equality, men would not have felt so much resentment. The one who makes demands is seen as the one who creates polarisation.

This analysis contains three fundamental flaws. First, it is morally dubious, as it makes the oppressed responsible for their oppression. Secondly, it is based on the same, stereotyped misconception of which 'identity politics' is often accused. Anyone who believes that focusing on issues of racism will automatically create a backlash among the 'white working class' -- a verbal construct of very recent vintage -- makes the prejudiced assumption that the latter is a homogeneous group, with given, deeply-rooted, conservative views.

The third error in the reasoning is that it does not seem to correspond to reality. In the two major political rights projects that have emerged in recent years, #metoo and Black Lives Matter, the result has been rather the opposite. The loud demands have not led to a marginalisation of these movements. Instead, they have raised awareness of, and sensitivity towards, the issues far beyond those directly affected. 'Identity politics' has engendered recognition, solidarity and broad alliances.

Where does the intense anger come from in the 'culture wars', these storms of hatred? A real fear of lost privileges, a grief over a world that is disappearing? Yes, but to a large extent the rage is inflated and synthetic.

In her acclaimed recent history of the US, These Truths, the Harvard professor Jill Lepore identifies 'social media' as where the civic idea of conversation and deliberation shaping democracy comes to a dead end. On their platforms a specific type of speech is rewarded -- angry and resentful -- distorting not only politics but also professional journalism. It is easy to whip up a Twitter storm, while to be the target of one can be very painful.

It is important to recognise that the left has problems with intolerance. There are dangerous tendencies within the so-called 'cancel culture', especially when the reaction to a provocative statement is not to respond to it but to try to get the person fired. Yet it is important to be careful and precise. The fact that it is not as easy today to express certain views unchallenged is not in itself a sign of 'illiberalism'. That people forcefully object when transgender individuals are attacked or when the N-word is used should be understood as an extension of rights and liberties to those previously denied them -- not a restriction.

Racial oppression

Trump, writes Masha Gessen in her new book Surviving Autocracy, is not an exception but a logical consequence of history. He stands on the shoulders of 400 years of racial oppression and 15 years of intense mobilisation -- in laws and language, in the media and on the internet -- against Muslims, immigrants and, generically, the Other.

Lewis and Martin Luther King fought for the rights of black Americans as a way to expand the definition of who belongs. Trump's project -- as with the Sweden Democrats, Hungary's Viktor Orbán and Poland's Andrzej Duda -- is actively to expel people from the group that constitutes the political 'we'. Conflicts over race and gender are different from other political arguments: a discussion of tax rates does not call into question anyone's existence. Conflicts over identity are much more visceral. For they ask the question: who has the right to belong? And they demand an answer.

(Pettersson is director of public policy at Schibsted Media Groupin, Norway)
- International Politics and Society (IPS) 

## Of Spies And Lies

03, Aug, 2020
P Kharel

Election year fever of an unusual type has seized the United States President Donald Trump's strategy to stem the sag in his public approval rating, even as opponent, former Vice-President Joe Biden, takes a lead of more than 12 points in the various public opinion polls. As the Republican Party candidate, Trump had narrowly defeated the Democratic Party opponent Hillary Clinton in November 2016.

For the first time and so consistently, Trump's unfathomable allegations against his critics and overbearing claims against political rivals have begun to erode his support base. China seems to be the proverbial straw for the clearly fledgling campaign of the incumbent president, who has earned the tag of one of the most controversial occupants of the White House in the post-World War decades.

Trump's desperation is echoed by observation made by CNN's Fareed Zakaria about the president's "use of unsubstantiated claim of election rigging in the US". This explains why hardly a day passes without some sweeping comments passed or threatening notes issued by either the president himself or one of his lieutenants. Pressure is also being mounted upon American allies - mostly of the European mould - to take measures aimed at what is seen as the beginning of a partial economic boycott. In response, American allies get to make the right noises for the White House ears.

Vote-getting ploy

Republican campaign strategists want to convince voters that it is only Trump who not only can stand up to China but also contain the communist regime when it comes to "aggressive expansion in South China Sea", copyright theft and supposedly dubious economic deals waylaying the weak and corrupt. Last fortnight, Washington ordered Beijing to close down its consulate in Houston, described as a "spying hub". In a message that it is not taking things lying down, Beijing retaliated with a prompt directive that the US ceases operations in Chengdu.

Cyber espionage is the new arena where non-Western players have enhanced their presence causing big worries in the former on account of their vulnerabilities to the resultant intrusion into their state secrets. Western monopoly has suffered a deep dent. The days of a single bloc's heavy dominance in the secretive operations of espionage seem to be drawing to a close. Today, individual states might enjoy a cutting edge over another state in certain stances for some time-but not for all occasions and through all routes.

Of late, a spate of reports in the British media suggests that Russian and Chinese spy agencies have expanded their intelligence networks against Britain and the US. The British Telegraph newspaper said the Kremlin "tried to meddle in Scottish independence vote". Russian hacking, asserted a report in the Economist magazine, tries to gain access to American, British and Canadian vaccine research. BBC security correspondent Frank Gardner reported that a dossier compiled with the help of a former spy for the British intelligence agency MI6 accuses China of trying to manipulate key British figures to back the telecom giant's business in the once imperial power.

Spy agencies are all engaged in the "murky" business of gathering information, trying to manipulate people and engineering decisions. Even if the Western media allegations against Beijing and Moscow were true, it would not be surprising at all. Five years ago, the US was stunned that its six decades of espionage network in China had been "smashed".

An AFP story gives an inkling of how things are transacted in the secretive cloak and dagger operations: "For more than 70 years, Moscow has filled its embassy and consulates in the United States with intelligence operatives - as Washington does with its own diplomatic outposts in Russia - giving them the mission of stealing the most significant secrets of a longtime adversary."

In this business, even the best of allies are not spared. In 2016, German Chancellor Angela Merkel replaced the chief of her foreign intelligence service, Gerhard Schindler, after Edward J. Snowden, a former American contractor for the US National Security Agency, disclosure that Washington had tapped her cellphone. American President Barack Obama tried to pacify Merkel but she was far from being convinced about the suggested oversight.

Winner of many international journalism awards, Julian Assange's WikiLeaks dropped a big bomb with documents showing the American Central Intelligence Agency's possession of cyber weapons that could intrude into Apple and Android smartphones, Windows computers, automotive computer systems, online calling service, Skype, Wi-Fi networks and a series of other manifestations of the new information and communication technology.

Secrecy & loyalty

In the 1950s and the 1960s, British aggressive campaign against communism, known as "containment", deployed "Z" agents that included journalists, publishers and businessmen recruited by MI 6. Callously corrupt pilfered state secrets to sell them to foreign forces for money and other dubious incentives.

In Secrecy and Democracy: The CIA Transition, Admiral Stansfield Turner, former Director of the US Central Intelligence, says: "The most adverse exposure was a series of revelations about more than ten years of CIA interference in Chile, from 1963 to 1973, when the CIA underwrote more than half of the expenses of the Christian Democratic Party's campaign. This support was directed at defeating the communist candidate, Salvador Allende." Informers, agents, and deep agents are recruited to prey on politicians, policymakers, scientists, research institutions and professionals, among others. Turner, who looked after also the CIA during the Carter presidency, admits: "The CIA looks for college graduates who have excelled academically and who work well with people."

Spying takes place everywhere by any number of agencies. Now no longer in circulation, The Independent weekly reported on "Thimpu Spy Ring!" Inmates of a refugee camp in Nepal's Jhapa district nabbed Bishnu Rai, an agent of the Bhutanese army, who confessed having been deputed to spy on Bhutanese dissidents and refugees in Nepal. There were nine spies in his group. Sleuthing skills, well-placed contacts and connections are the prized possessions of those engaged in espionage. Often the motto of spies is to plant lies for disinformation while also ingratiating themselves to well-placed people for the vital information their recruiters hunger for.

Spying makes a hero for whom an agent works for but gets the tag of a traitor from those s/he spies against. Loyalty constitutes a highly valued virtue in the world of spies. States with no anti-espionage or counterintelligence agencies are either a heaven without intrusion into state secrets or a haven for conspiratorial activity by forces within and outside.

(Professor P. Kharel specialises in political communication.) 

## BRI Can Bring Infrastructure Revolution

04 Aug, 2020
C. Mani Chaulagain

Without adequate infrastructure development, a country cannot move towards the path of prosperity. For the country like Nepal, infrastructure development is the key to transform itself from the Least Developed Country to developing one. A national infrastructure network consists of national highways, railways, ports, bridges, tunnels, metro, national information highways. They form the backbone of a nation, bringing direct and indirect socio-economic benefits to its citizens. Infrastructure development can be effective through the public-private partnership approach.

Huge investment

However, building a robust and well-planned infrastructure would require a huge sum of investment. According to an ADB report, Asia will need an investment of US\$ 26 trillion in infrastructure by the end of 2030. Currently, the region annually invests an estimated US\$881 billion in the infrastructure. The infrastructure investment gap, which involves difference between investment need and current investment level, stands at 2.4 per cent of projected GDP for the five-year period from 2016 to 2020. This is where the relevance of the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) comes. BRI is a transcontinental long-term policy and investment programme aimed at propelling socio-economic development in BRI member states by means of infrastructure development and acceleration of the economic integration of countries along the route of the historic Silk Road. Nepal as a close neighbour of China and a BRI member, should harness the enormous benefits from the global initiative.

Infrastructure connectivity is the central part of the BRI participated in by more than 138 countries and 30 plus international organisations. Some major BRI regional projects include Laos–China Cross Border Railway, Bangladesh Padma Bridge Rail Link, China-Western Europe Intercontinental Highway and China–Pakistan Economic Corridor, among others. China has invested in these strategic infrastructures, which have proved to be the game changer in the region.

The historic visit of Chinese President Xi Jinping to Nepal in October last year has laid a strong foundation for increased cooperation between the two neighbours under the BRI framework. During the president Xi's visit, the two nations agreed to promote infrastructure connectivity by developing cross-border railway and roadway. They also decided to boost institutional-level coordination on policy sharing, synchronisation and information between the relevant institutions from two nations.

Nepal is pushing scores of cross-border connectivity projects to be implemented under the BRI framework. China-Nepal Cross-Border Railway that starts from Xian and passes through Lhasa and Shigatse and arrives in Kerung near Nepal-China border. Both the governments have decided to conduct feasibility study, prepare DPR and explore appropriate modality for the railway construction. Likewise, the two nations are working to upgrade Kerung-Kathmandu, Tatopani-Kathmandu cross-border roads which play an instrumental role in boosting bilateral trade, tourism and people-to-people relations.

The proposed Koshi Corridor Project is located in State 1 in eastern Nepal. It starts from Leguwa township of Dhankuta district and ends at Kimathanka of Sankhuwasabha district, connecting with Chentang town at China-Nepal border. The estimated length of this road is 182 kilometres. The proposed Kaligandaki corridor is a part of North-South road which starts at Belahiya in Rupandehi district and ends at Korala (Mustang district). The 403-kilometre-long Karnali corridor will link Surkhet of Karnali state with Hilsa village along Nepal-China border. The road will play an important role in uplifting the socio-economic development of Karnali and Sudurmpaschim states.

The proposed cross-border transmission line extends from Galchhi in Nepal to Shigatse of China. Of estimated 800-km long transmission line, about 80-km lies within Nepali territory. The Nepali portion of the power line will stretch from Galchhi in Dhading district to Rasuwagadhi in the border with China. Likewise, the cross-border optical fibre network can bring about a digital revolution in Nepal. China possesses one of the most advanced ICT networks in the world. By interconnecting telecom and IT networks of both the countries, Nepal will see the reduction in the cost of the international bandwidth, which is still quite high (around 8 US\$ per MB per month). Likewise, Nepal can have access to advanced Chinese internet contents and applications. Currently, Chinese mobile operators and Nepali mobile operators have cooperated on bandwidth sharing to ensure Nepal's access to regional internet hub in Hong Kong.

It is only through the infrastructure revolution that a nation can unleash the development potential fast. The BRI cooperation can be instrumental in triggering development. So, what does Nepal need to do in order to benefit from BRI cooperation? Is Nepal working sincerely to implement the gigantic cooperation project with necessary administrative and legislative framework? Are policy bottlenecks hampering the realisation of the BRI?

Legislative apparatus

Government of Nepal should gear up for necessary policy support so as to create conducive environment for the increased cooperation. Nepal should formulate, enact national financing policies and legislation for setting up a legal framework for introduction of financing and execution of the projects. This will lay the foundation to embrace this landmark cooperation of 21st century. Robust legislative apparatus and efficient administrative processes are the key to the successful implementation of BRI cooperation in Nepal.

(Chaulagain is an engineering graduate from China and chairman of One World Corporations. manichuda\@hotmail.com) 

## New provisions for MFIs

04 Aug, 2020
Uttam Maharjan

In a poor country like Nepal, where rural areas outnumber urban areas and where the majority of poor people live in rural areas, the importance of microfinance cannot be overemphasised. The broad thrust of microfinance institutions is to reduce poverty by embarking upon various programmes such as financial, skill development, health and education programmes for the uplift of the standard of living of the poor. Microfinance institutions play a pivotal role in generating income for the poor by creating gainful employment opportunities by providing them with small loans and savings facilities. They also serve as a tool for empowerment of the underprivileged.

There are now 87 microfinance institutions in Nepal. Out of these, 30 are national-level entities. In order to strengthen microfinance institutions and ensure that their services are better utilised by the underprivileged, Nepal Rastra Bank has introduced some new provisions through the monetary policy. In the first place, the cap on interest on loans has been fixed at not more than 15 per cent. The loan limit has been increased from Rs. one million to Rs. 1.5 million for members of groups or individuals living in rural areas to operate micro-enterprises. In like manner, microfinance institutions have been barred from levying not more than a 1.5 per cent service charge on borrowers.

Previously, the interest on loans was up to 18 per cent with a service charge at 2 to 2.5 per cent. Furthermore, no service charge can be levied on depositors in the course of the operation of their accounts. These provisions are a respite for both borrowers and depositors, who happen to belong to the underprivileged class. It may be of relevance to note that cooperatives can levy not more than 16 per cent interest on loans. Both cooperatives and microfinance institutions belong to the 'D' category of banks and financial institutions.

Fund mobilisation

Microfinance institutions operate their business by mobilising funds from banks and depositors. They have invested around Rs. 260 billion in loans, out of which Rs. 165 billion is from loans from banks and Rs. 95 billion is from deposits. They used to take loans from banks at 11 per cent. As the interest to be levied on loans has been limited to 15 per cent, they are expecting a lower interest rate from banks, too. Otherwise, they may face a survival crisis. As banks are lowering interest both on deposits and on loans due to excessive liquidity in the market and a sluggish demand for loans, the interest on loans to microfinance institutions may hopefully come down.

Nepal Rastra Bank has also restricted the distribution of a dividend. As per the new provision, only 30 per cent of the net distributable profit can be distributed as a cash dividend. If such a profit is less than five per cent of the total paid-up capital, no cash dividend can be distributed save for tax purposes.

Now, microfinance institutions have to choose their areas of operation: whether they want to operate in a state or throughout the nation. If a microfinance institution is operating in more than one state, it has to choose only one state to operate in. Alternatively, such an institution may jack up its capital to the required level and upgrade itself to a national-level entity. Microfinance institutions will have to do the needful in this regard by Asadh-end of 2078.

The merger and acquisition process has been going on for the last few years. Nepal Rastra Bank has not rowed back on the process; rather, the central regulatory authority is encouraging banks and financial institutions to adopt the merger and acquisition process. Nepal Rastra Bank thinks that 30 or 35 microfinance institutions are enough for the country on the basis of the population and the size of the market. So the central regulator has directed cross-holding microfinance institutions to merge and intends that microfinance institutions directly or indirectly owned and controlled by the same family or business group and those having established business relations be merged.

Nepal Rastra Bank has offered various incentives, including those as stipulated in the Merger and Acquisition of Banks and Financial Institutions Regulation 2073, to microfinance institutions that merge. For example, for those merged microfinance institutions conducting joint operations by Asadh-end of 2078, the deadline for regularizing loans crossing the single obligor limit will be extended, the deadline for fulfilling the capital fund ratio will be extended and the six-month cooling period for directors, CEOs and deputy CEOs for joining other institutions licenced by Nepal Rastra Bank will be waived.

Nepal Rastra Bank has also introduced a relief package for borrowers. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the borrowers of microfinance institutions have also found it difficult to repay their loans. So the deadline for repayment of loans not realized in Asadh will have to be extended within Aswin by six months, i.e. up to Chait-end of this year, by analysing the nature of business, the extent of the COVID-19 impact, the time required for restoring business and the requirements of borrowers, among others.

Fixed deposit

Nepal Rastra Bank has also debarred microfinance institutions from opening fixed deposits in banks for more than three months. Such fixed deposits cannot be renewed, either after maturity. The rationale behind this step is to encourage microfinance institutions to mobilise their funds for the targeted groups rather than hoard them in banks. In a nutshell, the recent steps taken by Nepal Rastra Bank are designed to beef up microfinance institutions, enhance their capacity building and enable the underprivileged to enjoy microfinance services for the betterment of their livelihoods and their community.

(Former banker, Maharjan has been regularly writing on contemporary issues for this daily since 2000. uttam.maharjan1964\@gmail.com) 

## Monetary Policy Boosts Business Confidence

19 Jul, 2020 

The COVID-19 pandemic has brought nations across the globe to their knees, with disastrous repercussions on the people's mobility, economy, trade and supply chains of basic commodities. It hit hard both micro- and macroeconomic spheres as manufacturing and service sector shrank beyond imagination. As business activities came to an abrupt halt, banking sector suffered from the low transaction and problems in the adjustment of interest rates. The pandemic and resultant extended lockdown hampered the government's efforts to maintain sustained growth of Gross Domestic Product (GDP), keep unemployment rate at low level, and manage foreign exchange and inflation in a predictable range. It is only with the proper monetary policy that the country can fix these macroeconomic challenges effectively because it includes the measures such as modifying interest rates, refinancing, issuing government bonds, managing the money supply and regulating foreign exchange rates.

Taking into account the corona-induced looming economic recession, Nepal Rastra Bank (NRB) the other day rolled out a set of new monetary policies to rescue the hard-hit businesses like tourism, hospitality, manufacturing and trade as well as troubled banks and financial institutions (BFIs). It has extended the loan repayment deadline, and offered refinance facilities, grace period extension for infrastructure projects and concessional loans to the worst-hit sector like airlines services, hotels, restaurants and other tourism-related businesses. The business entrepreneurs have felt a huge respite after the central government announced the extension of loan repayment period by a year, with an assurance that it would consider extend the deadline further if situation demands. Those moderately affected by the lockdown will get nine-month period to repay the loan's instalment and interest. The policy has a provision to restructure and reschedule the loans of the debtor active till mid-January next year if the client presents a written action plan. The loan restructuring will be carried out through the instruments like private equity, venture capital, debt equity conversion and special purpose vehicle, according to the news report of this daily.

The BFIs have a reason to commend the new monetary policy that has promised to revise the credit to core-capital plus deposit (CCD) ratio by 5 to 85 per cent for the current fiscal year. This measure is likely to open a window for the investment of more than Rs 183 billion and boost the confidence of local and foreign investors. In yet another important step, the central bank has prevented the BFIs from distributing case dividend in cash they earn net profit less than 5 per cent of the paid-up capital. Those earning higher profit can distribute only 30 per cent of it in the cash dividend. This is prudent policy aimed at diverting scarce resources to the productive economic sector at a time when unemployment rate has soared, with hundreds of thousands of Nepali migrant workers returning home after losing jobs in the foreign labour market.

The NRB has announced to bring down the microfinance loan to 15 per cent from 18 per cent. It has unveiled regulatory provisions for the licensing process for the payment service providers. The special refinancing for the export-oriented industry and sick enterprises, micro, cottage and small enterprises is expected to revive the slackened industries. The policy calls on related banks to issue agriculture and energy bonds, and Farmer Credit Cards to generate additional resources to tap the immense potentials that the country's hydropower and agro sector hold. The NRB has introduced pragmatic and realistic monetary policy expected to rescue the flattened economy by restoring stability in the banking sector and encouraging investment in new projects. 

## Deepening Nepal-China Ties

02 Aug, 2020

Nepal and China had established their diplomatic relations sixty-five years to the day on August 1, 1955, opening a new chapter in their age-old bonhomie. Both the nations had emerged from their internal political turmoil and gained independence so they collectively decided to develop their relations based on new foreign policy principles and values which would reflect the spirit of changes and aspirations of their people. In their joint communiqué, they expressed commitment to Panchsheel (five principles of peaceful coexistence) which stresses non-interference, equal treatment and mutual respect for each other's sovereignty and territorial integrity. It reinforces a model of peaceful coexistence between the two countries of different size.

Sixty-five years on, the bilateral relations have gone from strength to strength because their bond is based on political trust, support to each other on issues concerning respective core interests and mutual economic cooperation. The cordial ties are not only confined to the government-to-government layer but also to the people-to-people level, with growing exchanges of high level visits, connectivity, trade, tourism and education programmes. China has extended economic cooperation to Nepal in different areas ranging from infrastructure development to reconstruction of structures damaged by the earthquake and hydropower development to education, culture, trade, security and governance system. Nepal has on its part adhered to One-China policy that prohibits any anti-Chinese activities on Nepali soil.

In 2016, Nepal and China inked a historic Transport and Transit Agreement that transformed Nepal from the land-locked country to a land-linked one. Nepal has now access to seven Chinese sea and land ports, enabling it to carry out trade with third countries. In 2017, Nepal joined Belt and Road Initiative (BRI), a global development endeavour launched by Chinese President Xi Jinping. In March last year, President Bidya Devi Bhandari visited China while her Chinese counterpart, Xi, reciprocated it by paying a state visit to the Himalayan nation in October 2019 after a gap of 23 years. The visits of two presidents elevated the bilateral relationship to a strategic partnership for cooperation featuring ever-lasting friendship.

In his message delivered on the 65th anniversary of diplomatic ties, Prime Minister KP Sharma Oli said that Nepal-China bilateral ties had been developing in a stable and healthy way. While appreciating China's support in anti-epidemic efforts, he said he was looking forward to working closely with China for economic recovery. Likewise, Chinese President Xi said that he attached great importance to the development of China-Nepal relations and was willing to work with his Nepali counterpart, Bhandari, to bring greater benefits to the two peoples and make positive contributions to regional stability and development.

Nepal and China have helped each other in the difficult moments. China had lent humanitarian support to Nepal during the 2015 earthquake and ensuing economic embargo. In order to effectively fight the COVID-19 pandemic, the two nations are working closely. China provided medical supplies to Nepal to ease its battle against the deadly virus disease. In early February when the coronavirus hit hard China's central city of Wuhan, Nepal's government and people expressed their strong solidarity with the Chinese government and the people, sending face masks and letters of sympathy to the people of Wuhan. Let's hope that this spirit of bilateral cooperation will further expand and deepen in the years to come. 

## Foreign Aid Vital For Development

Editor 02 Aug, 2020 

Ujjawal Gautam

With the current discourse and quandary on Millennium Challenge Corporation (MCC) endorsement, the effectiveness and ramifications of aid has raised prominent concerns than ever. Further, the issues of reconstruction, the COVID-19 management, and Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) demands effective aid for the aid-dependent country like Nepal.

Foreign aid has been an indispensable part of Nepal's development landscape for seven decades. Economic surveys show that foreign aid has contributed 44.67 per cent in total periodic plans of the country. Until the 1990s, some 60-80 per cent of annual development budget was dependent upon foreign aid as revealed by Institute for Integrated Development Studies. In FY 2018/19 alone, Official Development Assistance (ODA) made up 24 per cent of the national budget. However, Nepal remains one of the poorest countries with meagre per capita income of US\$ 1,047 and 18.7 per cent per cent in absolute poverty whereas 28.6 per cent falls under the multidimensional poverty as per the 15th plan. It lags far behind in development outcomes with comparatively higher transaction costs. In line with the Paris Declaration, 2005, the effectiveness of aid in Nepal is dismal but we are not able to say what would have happened in the total socio-economic development devoid of aid.

Effective utilisation

For the effective utilisation of aid, Nepal devised separate foreign aid policy and adhered to the Paris Principles and its subsequent declarations but the degree of compliance at operational level is far from satisfactory.

The predictability of development cooperation in Nepal falls below the global average as highlighted by Development Cooperation Report, 2019. The aid envisaged under the agreements is disbursed mostly. But the government has largely been unable to translate the pledged commitments to agreements. For instance, on June 25, 2015, the International Conference on Nepal's Reconstruction (ICNR) donors pledged \$4.4 billion in aid but Nepal hasn't been able to translate those pledged commitments to agreements. Further, maximum foreign aid has arrived through other mechanisms and the disbursement of aid to the spending unit is also unreliable. Usually, the first and second trimester gets lapsed creating difficulty in effective execution.

Regarding the ownership, most of the aids are not guided by a country-owned long-term vision linked to medium-term strategies. The journey so far has remained as donor-driven rather than beneficiary driven. Donors have the upper hand from drafting of the proposals to the implementation of those documents. One of the secretaries of the Government of Nepal said, "The donors who are funding our development projects make the entire project document for us and we just do some comments and additions. Therefore, by heart, we have little ownership of projects." The 2018 Global Partnership monitoring results can further corroborate the degree of low ownership, which shows that development partners use government data and statistics only 46 per cent of time for monitoring. Moreover, the aspects of community engagement in the foreign-aided projects are rare and just for meeting formality.

In the case of alignment of aid, there are efforts to connect aid programmes with country policies and processes, and it is getting touched somehow in national programmes. As per Development Cooperation Report, 78 per cent of ODA in FY 2018/19 was recorded on budget and has made improvements to its public financial management systems. Successive Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) assessments results are also the validation of the fact. Despite this, aid fragmentation in Nepal is still high, as demonstrated Herfindahl Index analysis.

In regard with harmonisation, the coordination has been improved at strategic level but the provision of joint monitoring and supervision, joint analytical review, and development of a single or integrated database is still lagging. As per the Development Cooperation Report, development partners in Nepal were engaged with, on average, eight different line ministries, with some engaged with up to 25 ministries in FY 2018/19. The capacity of ultimate beneficiary and recipients hasn't been developed and it has been an escape point for the donors as well.

Various researches and studies have revealed numerous factors shaping the effectiveness of aid. The early days of Nepal were hampered considerably by political instability and incapability in planning and implementation whereas the later days are hampered severely by the interplay of various national and international factors, competing policies and mechanisms.

The major factors like the proper selection of aid, implementation modality, negotiation strength, adherence to foreign aid policy, consideration to the host country interests, strategic instruments, dedicated human resource, efficient funding, and reporting mechanism have a beneficial impact in the direction of aid effectiveness.

In stark contrast, the low absorption capacity of the country, lack of holistic approach from the donor side, non-alignment with the country system, high fiduciary risks, policy practice gap, various escape points, etc. have detrimental effects on aid effectiveness. Further, staff turnover, rigidity in reprogramming and remodelling, conditionality, parallel audits mechanism, drastic change in the fund, irregularities in financial transactions, disbursement delays, ignorance of donors policy, lack of common understanding, complex bureaucratic procedures, etc. are the major impediments in aid effectiveness.

From the past, it can be safely noted that the contestation among the actors and mechanism has led to ineffective aid whereas the adaptation of the actors to the mechanism has resulted in effectiveness. Similarly, legitimation and validation to the country's systems, policies, and indigenous approaches have led to the effectiveness whereas de-legitimation has caused ineffectiveness of aid.

Way forward

As Nepal's own developmental resources are limited, most of them have to come from external assistance. In the present context, the country's quest to exit the poor man club, achieve SDGs, smoothly complete post-earthquake reconstruction, strengthen federalism, and manage COVID-19 efficiently, inter alia, demand a huge amount of resources. The Ministry of Finance has estimated that an annual economic growth rate of more than 8 per cent is needed for meeting public aspirations from the new system.  Against this backdrop, we are not in a practical position to reject aid. This, however, doesn't mean that we should accept any kind of aid and continue begging irrespective of its repercussions. The dependency should be reduced gradually towards the journey of economic independence. Here, MCC can play a vital role in rectifying the previous shortcomings and set a benchmark for effectiveness of aid to hit the bull's eye.

(An M.A. in Public Policy and Governance from North South University, Gautam is a tax officer at the Ministry of Finance. Ujjwalgautam2010\@gmail.com)

## 65 Years Of Nepal-China Diplomatic Ties Investment Prospects From China

Editor 01 Aug, 2020 

Leela Mani Paudyal

For an investor, an investment decision is subject to the factual and perceptual environment. The factual environment can be objectively concluded if the published or inquired figures are reliable and track record of investment regime is credible. But the predictability of perceptual environment for foreign direct investment is a subjective parameter mostly analysed and evaluated on the basis of political trust and confidence between the governments. Therefore, good political relation boosts the confidence of the investor and vice versa.

The year 2020/21 is the 65th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations between Nepal and China. If we look at Nepal-China relations of past 65 years from investors' perspective, Chinese investors are seen recently more confident for putting their money, technology and expertise in Nepal. The rise of confidence is a result of deep-rooted cultural and people-to-people link from time immemorial and the cultivation of bilateral relations based on trust, good neighbourliness and enhanced understanding between the leaders from both countries.

Owing to the COVID-19 pandemic, the global economy has suffered the greatest shock since the World War II. Experts from China and abroad have been expressing quite often that Chinese economy is expected to rebound soon while the Chinese government has also highlighted continued economic progress in 2020. Recent statistics released by the Chinese government indicate that Chinese economy grew by more than 3 per cent in May 2020. China is the only big economy that is recovering quickly after relatively controlling the pandemic. China is the largest source for outbound tourists, the largest trading partner of more than 130 countries and one of the major sources as well as receiver of foreign direct investment in the world. Therefore, the recovery of Chinese economy is of paramount importance for global economic recovery.

Nepali economy is highly linked with Chinese economy. Today, China is the largest source country for foreign investment that has accounted for about two-thirds of total receipt as direct investment over the last four years. Further, China is one of the largest development partners, second largest trade partner and second largest source of tourists for Nepal. Against this backdrop, a close collaboration with China is of critical importance to rescue and revive Nepali economy battered by coronavirus-induced lockdown and other restrictive measures adopted to rein in the virus's spread.

We normally organise conferences and symposiums for delivering investment policies, procedures but less often on viability of the projects. The list of projects which we have offered is a mere wish list than projects ready to invest in. We are not very clear on procedures for getting into the project. That makes investors confused. Some of the projects we have listed with some preparation too lack clarity on funding modalities and procedures. Predictability or consistency on what is written in legal or procedural format and what is delivered or interpreted by the officials at the counter matters more than in advocacy on policy issues through conferences. One window service should not be one more window and additional cost centre. The service fee charged by Investment Board of Nepal is not justified with its service provided to the clients. It is neither effective nor competent enough to provide one window service to the investors.

The conflict between concerned ministries and the Investment Board of Nepal has put some of the projects in limbo for a decade. Projects and investors are sometimes victimised due to the tussle between the line ministry and the Board after the project is awarded. Therefore, it is recommended to establish professional consultancies which can provide a range of services from project preparation, data analysis, registration and licensing to the land acquisition, tax, legal, procedural matters to the investors in a transparent manner. Leadership requires avoiding negotiations through middleman sans the track record of professional competency, transparency and accountability of such agents. The government should come out with the list of ready to invest projects, with clear and explicit procedures to involve in the project, legal and financial obligations of support to be provided to the investors in early years for establishment, land acquisition, power connectivity, transport connectivity and visa procedures to start business.

President Bidya Devi Bhandari paid the first ever state visit to China in March 2019 while Chinese President Xi Jinping arrived in Nepal in October last year after a gap of 23 years. During the visit of both Presidents, agreements on development cooperation, trade, investment, industrial development, transit transport, agriculture, railway and border cooperation were signed. Those agreements and understandings have opened up new avenues for potential investors. However, the understanding and agreements are waiting for speedy implementation with time bound action plans to produce tangible results.

Nepal's economy is in downward spiral due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Government revenue, development assistance, inward foreign investments and remittances inflows are all shrinking. Tourism, a backbone of Nepali economy and the most promising sector for economic development, has been paralysed. Nepal is highly a resource deficit country for development and prosperity, a long cherished goal of Nepali people. Therefore, Nepal needs to tap every opportunity for development finance with better terms.

China has leverage of having different windows for outbound investment. It has the largest contributor to the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank and BRICS bank. President Xi had announced 100 billion of funds during second International Belt and Road Cooperation Forum in April 2019 which is channelised through the BRI mechanism. Chinese Exim Bank is one of the largest Exim banks and several private investment funds are available in China. Out of world's 10 largest banks by total assets, five banks are from China. China has capability as well as willingness to support development financing for countries like Nepal. Against this backdrop, China's support in development cooperation, investment and tourism for the revival of economy in the post-COVID-19 era is critically important for Nepal.

Nepal can and should improve investment governance by simplifying procedures, making environment more predictable and preparing ready to invest projects bank to be financed from direct investment. There are several mechanisms and platforms constituted during the recent high level visits for implementing the agreements signed and exploring the potential areas of cooperation. The platforms thus created can be activated with mandate for identifying and developing potential projects for creating employment opportunities and reducing economic vulnerabilities. A competent interdisciplinary team can be set up to finalise the projects ready for funding from private investment and to set standard guidelines for negotiation in order to ensure better terms and conditions for sustainable financing to the projects. It requires concerted efforts to bring about the fruition of those high prospects.

(Paudyal is the former ambassador of Nepal to China.) 

## Dealing With Waterborne Diseases

26 Jul, 2020
Prof. Dr. Shyam P Lohani

Keeping our body hydrated is crucial for our health, but many people do not consume enough fluids each day. The safety and accessibility of drinking water are major concerns around the world. Worldwide, around 785 million people are deprived of drinking water service and about 144 million depend on surface water. An estimated 2 billion people globally use a drinking water source contaminated with faeces (WHO, 2019). There are numerous preventable diseases associated with unsafe and often contaminated water. The contaminated water and poor sanitation are linked to many water-borne diseases such as cholera, diarrhea, dysentery, hepatitis A, typhoid, and polio.

Contamination

Around 70 per cent of the planet's surface is covered by water. However, the freshwater required to sustain and enrich human life is only 2.5 per cent of the water available. Two-thirds of this water is tied up in glaciers and permanent snow cover leaving a scant 1 per cent to supply the growing needs around the globe. The available water source is also contaminated in many places throughout the world. Broadly speaking, water contaminants can be categorised into four groupings: microbiological, chemical, radiological, and physical. Microbiological contaminants can occur from four main classes of pathogens such as bacteria, viruses, protozoa, and helminthes.

Of all types of contaminants, microbiological contamination poses the greatest risk to public health owing to their ability to cause diseases with small infectious doses and can spread and contaminate the source rather quickly. Also, some microbiological contaminants are extremely persistent due to their ability to proliferate in aquatic environments. These contaminants are also difficult to monitor because they are discrete and are not evenly distributed throughout a water system. Often, the only indication that microbiological contamination is present is the occurrence of disease.

There is no unanimous definition of safe drinking water. However, the most agreed definition of safe drinking water is the water that does not represent any significant risk to health over a lifetime of consumption. The safe drinking water must be available to the people that are pure, wholesome, healthful, and potable. Each year, waterborne diseases afflict hundreds of millions of people, primarily those living without safe, accessible water in the developing countries. The latest research reveals that diarrhea is the second leading cause of death for children under the age of five, causing more childhood deaths than malaria, AIDS, and measles combined.

The microscopic organisms such as bacteria and viruses that contaminate water are responsible for waterborne diseases. Of the seven most common waterborne diseases in the world, diarrhea is the leading cause of mortality and morbidity. Every year more than 829,000 people die of diarrhea and most of them are from developing countries. Most of those deaths could have been prevented with the improvement of the drinking water source. About 88 per cent diarrheal deaths are caused by unsafe drinking water, inadequate availability of water for hygiene, and lack of access to sanitation.

The growing water scarcity in many urban as well as most of the rural parts of the country is leading people to use unsafe water for drinking as well as for other household chores. Often unplanned sewage system contaminates our drinking water supply system. The state of contamination can be correlated with the growing number of patients admitted to healthcare facilities during monsoon.

Water, sanitation, and hygiene hold the potential to prevent at least 9.1 per cent of the global disease burden and 6.3 per cent of all deaths throughout the world. Improved water sources can reduce diarrhea morbidity by 21 per cent; improved sanitation reduces diarrhea morbidity by 37.5 per cent, and the simple act of washing hands at critical times can reduce the number of diarrhea cases by as much as 35per cent. Improvement of drinking-water quality, such as point-of-use disinfection, would lead to a 45 per cent reduction of diarrhea episodes (CDC, 2016).

Prevention

To ensure a safe drinking water supply is to prevent contamination from occurring which involves decreasing the amount of contamination entering the water stream and importantly by creating barriers to keep contamination from entering the water supply. Decreasing the number of contaminants entering the water stream can be achieved through improving sanitation practices and ensuring that the source water is of acceptable quality. Besides, drinking water should be properly stored and handled to ensure safety.

The World Health Organisation (WHO) and other organisations have been advocating frequent hand washing with soap as one of the ways to reduce infection risk. The frequent and/or regular hand washing is effective as our hands touch different surfaces that support the viability of microorganisms. The dirt in our hands contains microbes which include viruses and bacteria. The clean water or warm water without soap help reduce the number of microbes but cannot remove most of the viruses and bacteria completely. Therefore, washing hands with clean water and soap prevents many infections including infections due to water-borne diseases.

The important ways to counter the burden of waterborne diseases can be achieved by ensuring safe drinking water, household treatment of water with chemical or boiling, practicing hand hygiene and treatment of diarrheal disease with oral rehydration solution. Therefore, the large scale awareness programme on the importance of safe drinking water for human life, methods to disinfect water from unreliable sources, and use oral rehydration solution for childhood diarrhea cannot be undermined to keep waterborne diseases at bay.

(Prof. Lohani is the founder and academic director of Nobel College. lohanis\@gmail.com)

## Micro Finance And New Monetary Policy

26 Jul, 2020
Gokul Chandra Adhikari

Nepal Rastra Bank has recently issued a new monetary policy for the fiscal year 2077/ 78 which focuses on providing some rehabilitation to the national economy. The nationwide lockdown enforced to contain the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic has paralysed the economy over the past few months. Monetary policies are mainly the central bank's own monetary programme. The central bank applies this policy and its objectives through banking activities.

Enhancing efficiency

Monetary policy for the fiscal year 2077/78 has aimed to make Micro Finance Institutions (MFI) and their activities more professional and respected. Through this policy, poor people can borrow loans with a low cost of fund from MFIs. In the places where there is a lack of financial services, this policy addresses to expanse the financial activities through MFI. The new monetary policy has addressed the MFI activities in eight different points. While these points are specifically addressed towards MFI, there are several other points in the policy which also applies to MFI as well.

Nepal Rastra Bank has postponed handing out licenses for new MFIs and has cancelled those who were currently in the process of receiving one. Earlier, the central bank used to issue license for new MFIs but encouraged old MFIs to merge together through indirect pressure at the same time. This led the central bank to face some criticisms as well. The new policy of withholding the license is now going to ease the process of merger policies in MFIs. A direct benefit from this policy is that now the MFIs should not pay more than 0.5 per cent service charge while borrowing money from different financial institutions. It enables the MFIs to collect resources with low cost of fund compared to the past.

It has also been announced that 10 per cent of the total refinance fund will be provided to MFIs by the central bank. As a result, the MFIs will receive a large amount at low interest rate through refinance. This will help to reduce the cost of funds of MFI significantly. The limit of mortgage loans has been expanded from Rs. 0.7 to Rs. 1.5 million for MFIs. Through this provision, MFIs may have an opportunity to widen their range of mortgage loans. However, the policy remains the same as earlier when it comes to limiting MFIs to flow only one third of their total loans for mortgage modality. Therefore, they still could not fully benefit from this provision.

Now, MFIs cannot charge more than 15 per cent interest rate and more than 1.5 per cent of service charge from their debtors. Hence this policy enables the debtors to find loans at low cost which will be beneficial for them. Due to this provision, income of MFIs is going to minimise significantly as the main source of income of these institutions is interest from debtors. Apart from the interests, the MFIs' another source of income is the service charge on the loan, but due to this provision, this path of income has narrowed down, too.

Since there is more liquidity in the banking sector at the moment, MFIs can find sources in low cost of fund and therefore can sustain themselves despite the 15 per cent cap on the interest rate. The situation, however, is not going to remain the same forever. A slight change in any of the variables in the economy could change the current situation and could result in a high cost of fund for borrowing from the banking sector due to high interest rate in the money market.

Even though the regulation body will have no objection, it would be unethical and unfair to increase the rate of interest in loans for MFIs since they are considered to be a social bank and friend of the poor. If the MFIs were able to mobilise the savings from public, a huge amount of source could have been compensated from there which would result in a low cost of fund. Unlike international practices, MFIs in Nepal do not have permission to collect deposits from public. Therefore, they have to be dependent on financial institutions and wholesale credit providers for source of fund.

Besides long-term funds for a targeted objective, MFIs cannot park their money in any financial institute as a fixed deposit for more than three months as per this monetary policy. This provision has also resulted in minimisation of the income of MFIs. MFIs should take this provision as the central bank's message to benefit them by mobilising their resources instead of parking in financial institutions. It is mentioned in the policy that the interest rate system will be made more manageable by implementing the base rate calculation system. As a result of this, the interest rate declaration system will be more scientific and expected to benefit the MFIs.

Expansion of services

The policy has made an effort to financially strengthen the MFIs. Efforts have been made to expand the services of MFIs to locations where they have not stepped in. The central bank has also encouraged merging and therefore halted the process of handing out new licenses for the time being. As indicated by the monetary policy, if MFIs themselves become more aware about good governance and their professional capacity, they will be more systematic and dignified in their way of working.

(The author is a former deputy director of Nepal Rastra Bank. agokul24\@gmail.com)
