## Fiduciary Risks

The word 'risk' derived from the early Italian word 'risicare', which means 'to dare' (Pickett, 2010). Risk, in this respect, is a choice rather than a fate. According to Griffiths (2005), "risk is a chance that an event or action will have an effect on an organization's ability to achieve its objectives and to successfully execute its strategy" (p. 33). Ministry of Federal Affairs and Local Development (2012) has defined the risks as the possibilities of unintended events that will result in negative and unexpected results. In this regard, World Bank cautions, "ignoring the risks may result in new crises that can reverse hardwon gains and endanger the reforms that produced these gains" (The World Bank, 2014, p. 3).

The notion of fiduciary risks in public finance is based on a simple premise of public governance that "no fund can be mobilized from the citizens or spent without explicit approval of their elected representatives" (Schiavo-Campo, 2007a, p. 55). For World Bank (2003), fiduciary risks are the results of deviation between actual expenditures and authorized budget. Since municipalities have not elected councils to authorize the executive branch of municipalities for spending and taxing, it is therefore assumed that fiduciary risks could be potential threats in the municipal finance in Nepal.

The UK's Department for International Development (DFID) has defined fiduciary risks as the "risks that funds are not used for the intended purpose; do not achieve for value for money; and/or not properly accounted for" (DFID, 2008, p. 4). It attributes fiduciary risks for a range of factors, including lack of capacity, practice of corruption, and weak accountability in the system of public finance. This definition clarifies that fiduciary risks are the results of corruption, capacity constraints, and other weaknesses in the system of public governance.

In consistent with the definition provided by DFID (2008), MoFALD has categorized fiduciary risks of local bodies into process risks, corruption risks, and result risks (MoFALD, 2012). Process related risks encompass the risks of non-compliance of due process of law in public financial management. Corruption risks are possibilities of misuse of fund for private gains by municipal officials. The result risk is the exposure of not producing expected outputs, outcomes, and impact due to corruption and/or weak capacity. Outcomes are immediate benefits generated by outputs from the use of public fund and other institutional resources. The outcome cannot be bought as it is about the beneficial changes for societies and/or organizations (Imas & Rist, 2009). Impacts are the longterm benefits to target groups produced by the outcomes. Thus, any development initiative financed through public funds lies on input-process-output-outcome-impact continuum.

Any deviation of this continuum is the symptom of fiduciary risks. This paper defines fiduciary risks as the possibility of misuse, mismanagement, inefficiency, and ineffectiveness of public fund due to weak capacity, poor or non-compliance of due process of law, and corruption in municipalities. Since capacity involves the ability to perform and ability to produce beneficial changes, results risks are embedded in capacity risks. In this respect, fiduciary risks in this paper are the combination of process risks, capacity risks, and corruption risks. Inefficiency occurs in public finance when spending agents use more resources than necessary to accomplish the assigned tasks primarily due to lack of ability or skills. Ineffectiveness occurs when spending agents cannot produce intended results out of public funds. Misuse is therefore using public funds in the wrong way or for the wrong purpose. Figure 4 shows the three critical components of fiduciary risks.

A fiduciary is an agent who prudently takes care of money or other assets for another person. The politicians and bureaucrats are the fiduciary agents of the people to whom the people have placed utmost trust and confidence to protect public funds. It is a legal and moral obligation of bureaucrats and/or politicians to act in the best interests of their principals. The fundamental feature of public finance is that the money does not belong to those who are in charge of spending. Politicians and/or bureaucrats spend people's money. "The money always belongs to the principal or the citizens and it is the agent or the bureaucrats and/or politicians to spend it for the maximum benefits of citizens" (Hagen, 2007, p. 27). In practice, the self-interested, if not rent seeking, agents may not always act in the best interests of their masters. The two most cited problems of public finance are the principal-agent problem and common pool problem. The principal-agent relationship in democracy between the voters (the principals) and politicians (the agents) may also be a causal effect of fiduciary risks.

In a democracy, voters delegate spending and taxing power to their elected representatives and there comes a possibility of rent extraction by spending against the will of general people (Hagen, 2008). The common pool problem arises when spending agents spend public fund only to the benefits of certain groups and that net benefits accrued to such groups exceed the average benefits received by people of the whole country (Weinggast & Wittman, 2008). In Nepal, often, powerful politicians divert a large chunk of budget to their constituency so that their constituents get more benefits in comparison to other constituents. The common pool problem therefore becomes an inequitable allocation of public fund to certain groups at the cost of the larger public. These problems violate the fiduciary duty of spending agents, which comes because of incomplete contracts in public finance.

Municipal officials are public agents and it is their legal and moral obligation to spend public fund at the best interests of citizens living in municipalities. In other words, they are fiduciary agents of local people and their fiduciary duty is to spend municipal fund efficiently and effectively for the maximum benefit of people. Any sort of misuse, mismanagement, inefficiency, and ineffectiveness in the use of public fund is the violation of their fiduciary obligations. Fiduciary risks, therefore, reflect on such possibilities of violation of fiduciary duty by fiduciary agents in municipalities.
